# Category: BASIC_ROM

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Cold Start Vector This vector points to the address of the routine used to initialize BASIC. After the Operating System finishes its power-on activities, it enters the BASIC program through this vector. The most visible effect of the BASIC initialization routine is that the screen is cleared, and the words COMMODORE 64 BASIC V2 **** are printed along with the BYTES FREE message. For details of the steps taken during the initialization of BASIC, see the entry for 58260 ($E394), the current cold start entry point. 40962-40963 $A002-$A003 Warm Start Vector The warm start vector points to the address of the routine used to reset BASIC after the STOP/RESTORE key combination is pressed. This is the same address to which the BRK instruction is vectored. 88
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 40960-40961
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A000-$A001
man: Page 102

---

nome: STMDSP
descrizione: Statement Dispatch Vector Table This table contains two-byte vectors, each of which points to an address which is one byte before the address of one of the routines that perform a BASIC statement. The statements are in token number order. When it comes time to execute a statement, the NEWSTT routine at 42926 ($A7AE) places this address-1 on the stack and jumps to the CHRGET routine. The RTS instruction at the end of that routine causes the statement address to be pulled off the stack, incremented, and placed in the Program Counter, just as if it were the actual return address. This table is handy for locating the address of the routine that performs a BASIC statement, so that the routine can be disassembled and examined. To aid in this purpose, the table is reproduced below with the actual target addresses, and not in the address-1 format used by BASIC. Token # Statement Routine Address 128 $80 END 43057 $A831 129 $81 FOR 42818 $A742 130 $82 NEXT 44318 $AD1E 131 $83 DATA 43256 $A8F8 132 $84 INPUT* 43941 $ABA5 133 $85 INPUT 43967 $ABBF 134 $86 DIM 45185 $B081 135 $87 READ 44038 $AC06 136 $88 LET 43429 $A9A5 137 $89 GOTO 43168 $A8A0 138 $8A RUN 43121 $A871 139 $8B IF 43304 $A928 140 $8C RESTORE 43037 $A8D 141 $8D GOSUB 43139 $A883 142 $8E RETURN 43218 $A8D2 143 $8F REM 43323 $A93B 144 $90 STOP 43055 $A82F 145 $92 ON 43339 $A94B 89
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 40972-41041
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A00C-$A051
man: Page 103

---

nome: ERRTAB
descrizione: ASCII Text of BASIC Error Messages This table contains the ASCII text of all of the BASIC error messages. As in the keyword table, Bit 7 of the last letter of each message is set to indicate the end of the message. Although we've all seen some of them at one time or another, it's somewhat daunting to see the whole list at once. The possible errors you can make include: 1. TOO MANY FILES 2. FILE OPEN 3. FILE NOT OPEN 4. FILE NOT FOUND 5. DEVICE NOT PRESENT 6. NOT INPUT FILE 7. NOT OUTPUT FILE 8. MISSING FILENAME 9. ILLEGAL DEVICE NUMBER 10. NEXT WITHOUT FOR 11. SYNTAX 12. RETURN WITHOUT GOSUB 13. OUT OF DATA 14. ILLEGAL QUANTITY 15. OVERFLOW 16. OUT OF MEMORY 17. UNDEF'D STATEMENT 18. BAD SUBSCRIPT 19. REDIM'D ARRAY 20. DIVISION BY ZERO 21. ILLEGAL DIRECT 22. TYPE MISMATCH 23. STRING TOO LONG 24. FILE DATA 25. FORMULA TOO COMPLEX 26. CAN'T CONTINUE 27. UNDEF'D FUNCTION 28. VERIFY 29. LOAD Message number 30, BREAK, is located in the Miscellaneous Messages table below. 4 1 768-4 1828 $ A328-$ A364 Error Message Vector Table This table contains the two-byte address of the first letter of each of the 30 error messages. 93
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 41374-41767
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A19E-$A327
man: Page 107

---

nome: OMERR
descrizione: OUT OF MEMORY Error Handler This routine just sets the error message code, and falls through to the general error handler. U U t I 4 1 829-4 1 865 $ A365-$ A389 Miscellaneous Messages The text of some of the other messages that BASIC can give you is stored here. This text includes cursor movement characters, and each j j message ends with a 0 character. The messages are: ^ 1) Carriage return, OK, carriage return 2) Space, space, ERROR I ( 3) Space, IN, space ^ 4) Carriage return, linefeed, READY., carriage return, linefeed 5) Carriage return, linefeed, BREAK 4 1 866-4 1911 $ A38A-$ A3B7 FNDFOR Find FOR on Stack This routine searches the stack for the blocks of data entries which are stored by each FOR command. For more information on the data that FOR places on the stack, see location 256 ($100). 41912 $A3B8 BLTU Open a Space in Memory for a New Program Line or Variable When a new nonarray variable is being created, or when a BASIC program line is being added or replaced, this routine is used to make room for the addition. It first checks to see if space is available, and then moves the program text and/or variables to make room. 41979-41991 $A3FB-$A407 GETSTK Check for Space on Stack Before undertaking an operation that requires stack space, this routine is used to check if there is enough room on the stack. If there is not, an OUT OF MEMORY error is issued. ( A 41992-42036 $A408-$A434 REASON Check for Space in Memory This is the subroutine that checks to see if there is enough space in free memory for proposed additions such as new lines of program text. If not, it calls for garbage collection, and if this still does not j j produce enough space, an OUT OF MEMORY error is issued. i I 94
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 42037-42088
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A435-$A468
man: Page 108

---

nome: ERROR
descrizione: General Error Handler The error number is passed to this routine in the .X register, and it displays the appropriate error message. Since this routine is vectored through RAM at 768 ($300), you can divert this vector to the address of your own routine, which would allow error trapping, or the addition of new commands. 42089-42099 $A469-$A473 Display ERROR or Other Message This portion of the routine tacks on the word ERROR to the message. This entry point is also used to print BREAK. 42100-42111 $A474-$A47F READY Print READY This routine displays the word READY, sets the Kernal message flag to show that direct mode is operative, and falls through to the main BASIC loop. 42 1 1 2-42 1 39 $ A480-$ A49B MAIN Main Loop, Receives Input and Executes Immediately or Stores as Program Line This is the main BASIC program loop. It" jumps through the RAM vector at 770 ($302), so this routine can be diverted. The routine gets a line of input from the keyboard, and checks for a line number. If there is a line number, the program branches to the routine that stores a line of program text. If there is no line number, it branches to the routine that executes statements. 42140 $A49C MAINl Add or Replace a tine of Program Text This routine calls subroutines to get the line number, tokenize keywords, and then looks for a line with the same number. If it finds a line with the same number, the routine deletes that line by moving all higher program text and variables down to where it started. The new line is then added. Since the CLR routine is called, the value of all current program variables is lost. 42291 $A533 LINKPRG Relink Lines of Tokenized Program Text Each line of program text starts with a pointer to the address of the next line (link address). This routine scans each line to the end (which is marked with a 0), and calculates the new link address by adding the offset to the address of the current statement. 95
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 42039-42088
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A437-$A468
man: Page 109

---

nome: INLIN
descrizione: Input a Line to Buffer from Keyboard This subroutine calls the Kemal CHRIN routine (61783, $F157) to obtain a line of input from the current input device (usually the keyboard). It stores the characters in the BASIC text input buffer at 512 ($200) until a carriage return or 89 characters have been received. The keyboard device wiW never return more than 80 characters before a carriage return, but other devices can output a longer line. An error will occur if the line goes over 88 characters. 42361 $A579 CRUNCH Tokenize Line in Input Buffer When a line of program text has been input into the BASIC text buffer at 512 ($200), this routine goes through the line and changes any keywords or their abbreviations, which do not appear in quotes, into the corresponding token. This command is vectored through RAM at 772 ($304), so it can be diverted in order to add new commands. 42515 $A613 FNDLIN Search for Line Number This routine searches through the program text, trying to match the two-byte integer line number that is stored in 20-21 ($14-$15). If it is found, 95-96 ($5F-$60) will be set as a pointer to the address of the link field for that line, and the Carry flag will be set. If it is not found, the Carry flag will be cleared. 42562 $A642 SCRTCH Perform NEW The NEW command stores two. zeros in the link address of the first program line to indicate the end of program, and sets the end of program pointer at 45-46 ($2D-$2E) to point to the byte past those zeros. It continues through to the CLR command code. 42590 $A65E CLEAR Perform CLR The CLR command closes all I/O files with the Kemal CLALL routine (62255, $F32F). It eliminates string variables by copying the end of memory pointer at 55-56 ($37-$38) to the bottom of strings pointer at 51-52 ($33-$34). It also copies the pointer to end of BASIC program text at 49-50 ($31-$32) to the pointer to the start of nonarray variables at 45-46 ($2D-$2E), the start of array variables at 47-48 ($2F-$30), and the end of array variables at 49-50 ($31-$32). This makes these variables unusable (although the contents of these areas are not actually erased). RESTORE is called to set the data pointer back to the beginning, and the stack is cleared. 96
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 42336
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A560
man: Page 110

---

nome: RUNG
descrizione: ' Reset Pointer to Current Text Character to the Beginning of Program Text [—1 This routine resets the CHRGET pointer TXTPTR (122-123, $7A' ' $7B) so that the next byte of text that the interpreter will read comes from the beginning of program text. 42652 $A69C LIST Perform LIST This routine saves the range of lines to be printed in pointers at 9596 ($5F- $60) and 20-21 ($14-$15), and then prints them out, tiranslating any tokens back to their ASCII equivalent. 42775 $A717 OPLOP Print BASIC Tokens as ASCII Characters This is the part of the LIST routine that changes one-byte program tokens back to their ASCII text characters. The routine is vectored through RAM at 774 ($306), so it is possible to list out new command words that you have added by changing this vector to detour through your own routine. 42818 $A742 FOR Perform FOR FOR is performed mostly by saving the needed information for the NEXT part of the command on the stack (see the entry for 256 ($100) for details). This includes the TO termination value, so if the upper limit is a variable, the current value of the variable will be stored, and you cannot end the loop early by decreasing the value of the TO variable within the loop (although you can end it early by increasing the value of the FOR variable within the loop). Also, since the TO expression is evaluated only once, at the time FOR is performed, a statement such as FOR 1=1 TO I+lOO is valid. The terminating value is not checked until NEXT is executed, so the loop statements always execute at least once. The variable used by FOR must be a nonarray floating point variable. Reusing the same FOR variable used in a loop that is still active will cause the previous FOR loop and all intervening loops to be cancelled. 42926 $A7AE NEWSTT Set Up Next Statement for Execution 1^ This routine tests for the STOP key, updates the pointer to the curI 1 rent line number, and positions the text pointer to read the beginning of the statement. n 97
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 42638
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A68E
man: Page 111

---

nome: GONE
descrizione: Read and Execute Next Statement This is the routine which gets the next token and executes the statement. It is vectored through RAM at 776 ($308) to allow the addition and execution of new statement tokens. Since a statement must always start with a token or an implied LET statement, this routine checks to see if the first character is a valid token. If it is, the address is placed on the stack, so that a call to CHRGET will return to the address of the code that executes the statement (see the table of statement tokens at 40972 ($AOOC)). An invalid token will cause a SYNTAX ERROR. A character whose ASCII value is less than 128 will cause LET to be executed. 43037 $A81D RESTOR Perform RESTORE The RESTORE command simply resets the DATA pointer at 65-66 ($41-$42) from the start of BASIC pointer at 43-44 ($2B-$2C). 43052 $A82C Test STOP Key for Break in Program The Kernal STOP routine is called from here, and if the key is pressed, the STOP (63213, $F6ED) command, below, is executed. 43055 $A82F STOP Perform STOP This entry point preserves the Carry flag (which is set to 1) and enters the END routine, which also performs STOP. 43057 $A831 END Perform END The current line number and text pointers are preserved for a possible CONT command, and the READY prompt is printed. If a STOP key break occurred, the BREAK message is printed first. 43095 $A857 CONT Perform CONT The CONT statement is performed by moving the saved pointers back to the current statement and current text character pointers. If the saved pointers cannot be retrieved, the CAN'T CONTINUE error statement is printed. 43121 $A871 RUN Perform RUN RUN is executed by calling the Kernal SETMSG (65048, $FE18) 98
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 42980
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A7E4
man: Page 112

---

nome: GOSUB
descrizione: Perform GOSUB This statement pushes the pointers to the current text character and current line onto the stack, along with a constant 141 ($8D) which identifies the block as saved GOSUB information to be used by RETURN. The GOTO is called. 43168 $A8A0 GOTO Perform GOTO This statement scans BASIC for the target line number (the scan starts with the current line if the target line number is higher, otherwise it starts with the first line). When the line is found, the pointers to the current statement and text character are changed, so that the target statement will be executed next. 43218 $A8D2 RETURN Perform RETURN The RETURN statement finds the saved GOSUB data on the stack, and uses it to restore the pointers to the current line and current character. This will cause execution to continue where it left off when GOSUB was executed. 43256 $A8F8 DATA Perform DATA DATA uses the next subroutine to find the offset to the next statement, and adds the offset to the current pointers so that the next statement will be executed. In effect, it skips the statement, much like REM. 43270 $A906 DATAN Search Program Text for the End of the Current BASIC Statement This routine starts at the current byte of program text and searches until it finds a zero character (line delimiter) or a colon character that is not in quotes (statement delimiter). 43304 $A928 IF Perform IF IF uses the FRMEVL routine at 44446 ($AD9E) to reduce the expression which follows to a single term. If the expression evaluates to 0 (false), the routine falls through to REM. If it is not 0, GOTO or the statement following THEN is executed. 99
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 43139
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A883
man: Page 113

---

nome: REM
descrizione: Perfonn REM The REM statement is executed by skipping all program text until the beginning of the next statement. It is actually a part of the IF statement, which continues for a few bytes after the REM part. 43339 $A94B ONGOTO Perform ON GOTO or ON GOSUB ON is performed by converting the argument to an integer, and then skipping a number between commas each time that the integer is ' decremented until the argument reaches 0. If a GOTO or GOSUB is the next token, the current number between commas is used to execute one of those statements. If the numbers between commas are used up before the argument reaches 0, the statement has no effect, and the next statement is executed. 43371 $A96B LINGET Convert an ASCII Decimal Number to a Two-Byte Binary Line Number This subroutine is used by several statements to read a decimal number, convert it to a two-byte integer line number (in low-byte, highbyte format), and check that it is in the correct range of 0-63999. 43429 $A9A5 LET Perform LET The LET command causes variables to be created and initialized, or to have a new value assigned. It handles all types of array or nonarray variables: strings, floating point, integer, ST, TI, and TI$. The routine is composed of several subroutines that evaluate the variable, evaluate the assigned expression, check that the assigned value is suitable for a variable of that type, and then assign a value to the existing variable, or create a new variable. 43648 $ilLA80 PRINTN Perform PRINT# The PRINT# statement calls CMD and then doses the output channel with the Kemal CLRCHN routine (62259, $F333). 43654 $AA86 CMD Perform CMD This routine calls the Kemal CHKOUT routine (62032, $F250), and calls PRINT to send any included text to the device. Unlike PRINT* it leaves the output channel open, so that output continues to go to that device. 100
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 43323
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A93B
man: Page 114

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: O PRINT Perform PRINT The PRINT routine has many segments, which are required for the various options which can be added to it: TAB, SPC, comma, semicolon, variables, PI, ST, TI, and TI$. Eventually, all output is converted to strings, and the Kemal CHROUT routine is called to print each character. 43806 $AB1E STROUT Print Message from a String Whose Address Is in the .Y and .A Registers This part of the PRINT routine outputs a string whose address is in the Accumulator (low byte) and .Y register (high byte), and which ends in a zero byte. 43853 $AB4D DOAGIN Error Message Formatting Routines for GET, INPUT, and READ 43899 $AB7B GET Perform GET and GET# The GET routine first makes sure that the program is not in direct mode. It opens an input channel using the Kemal CHKIN routine (61966, $F20E) if a number sign was added to make GET#. Then it calls the common I/O routines in READ to get a single character, and causes the input channel to be closed if one was opened. 43941 $ABA5 INPUTN Perform INPUT* This routine opens an input channel with the Kemal CHKIN routine, calls INPUT, and then closes the channel with a CHKOUT routine (62032, $F250). Extra data is discarded without an EXTRA IGNORED message, and a FILE DATA ERROR message is issued when the data type is not suitable for the type of variable used. 43967 $ABBF INPUT Perform INPUT The INPUT routine checks to make sure that direct mode is not active, prints prompts, receives a line of input from the device, and jumps to the common code in READ that assigns the input to the variables which were named. 44038 $AC06 READ Perform READ This routine includes the READ command and common code for
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 43680
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $AAA
man: Page 115

---

nome: EXIGNT
descrizione: ASCII Text for Input Error Messages The text stored here is ?EXTBIA IGNORED and ?REDO FROM START, each followed by a carriage return and a zero byte. 44318 $AD1E NEXT Perform NEXT NEXT is executed by finding the appropriate FOR data on the stack, adding the STEP value to the FOR variable, and comparing the result to the TO value. If the loop is done, the stack entries for that FOR command are removed from the stack. If the loop hasn't reached its limit, the pointers to the current statement and text character are updated from the FOR stack entry, which causes execution to continue with the statement after the FOR statement. 44426 $AD8A FRMNUM Evaluate a Numeric Expression and/or Check for Data Type Mismatch This routine can be called from different entry points to check the current data against the desired data type (string or numeric) to see if they match. If they don't, a TYPE MISMATCH error will result. 44446 $AD9E FRMEVL Evaluate Expression This is the beginning point of a very powerful group of subroutines which are used extensively by BASIC. The main purpose of these routines is to read in the ASCII text of BASIC expressions, separate the operators and terms of the ex- ^ j pression, check them for errors, combine the individual terms by t ) performing the indicated operations, and obtain a single value which the BASIC program can use. This can be a very complex task, as expressions can be of the | | string or numeric type, and can contain any type of variable, as well as constants. At the end, the flag which shows whether the resulting value is } ) string or numeric at 13 ($D) is set, and if the value is numeric, the — ' flag at 14 ($E) is set as well, to show if it is an integer or floating point number. j j 102
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 44284
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $ACFC
man: Page 116

---

nome: EVAL
descrizione: Convert a Single Numeric Term from ASCII Text to a Floating Point Number This routine reduces a single arithmetic term which is part of an expression from ASCII text to its floating point equivalent. If the term is a constant, the routine sets the data type flag to number, sets the text pointer to the first ASCII numeric character, and jumps to the routine which converts the ASCII string to a floating point number. If the term is a variable, the variable value is retrieved. If it is the PI character, the value of PI is moved into the Floating Point Accumulator. This routine is vectored through RAM at 778 ($30A). 44712 $AEA8 PIVAL PI Expressed as a Five-Byte Floating Point Number The value of PI is stored here as a five-byte floating point number. 44785 $AEF1 PARCHK Evaluate Expression Within Parentheses This routine evaluates an expression within parentheses by calling the S3mtax checking routines that look for opening and closing parentheses, and then calling FRMEVL 44446 ($AD9E) for each level of parentheses. 44791 $AEF7 CHKCLS Check for and Skip Closing Parentheses 44794 $AEFA CHKOPN Check for and Skip Opening Parentheses 44799 $AEFF CHKCOM Check for and Skip Comma This syntax checking device is the same in substance as the two checking routines above. It is used when the next character should rn be a comma. If it is not, a SYNTAX ERROR results. If it is, the char1 \ acter is skipped and the next character is read. Any character can be checked for and skipped this way by loading the character into the Accumulator and entering this routine from SYNCHR at 44799 n ($AEFF). 44808 $AF08 SNERR I I Print Syntax Error Message n 103
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 44675
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $AE83
man: Page 117

---

nome: ISVAR
descrizione: Get the Value of a Variable U U u 44967 $AFA7 ISFUN \ , Dispatch and Evaluate a Function ' — ' If a BASIC function (like ASC("A")) is part of an expression, this routine will use the function dispatch table at 42242 ($A502) to set up the address of the proper function routine, and then branch to that routine. 45030 $AFE6 OROP Perform OR The OR routine sets the .Y register as a flag, and falls through to the AND routine, which also performs OR. 45033 $AFE9 ANDOP Perform AND The AND routine changes the parameters to two-byte integer values, and performs the appropriate logical operation (AND or OR). A result of 0 signifies false, while a result of -1 signifies true. 45078 $B016 DOREl Perform Comparisons This routine does the greater than (>), less than (
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 44843
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $AF2B
man: Page 118

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Check If .A Register Holds Alphabetic ASCII Character This is part of the check for a valid variable name (it must start with an alphabetic character). 45341 $B11D NOTFNS Create a New BASIC Variable This routine makes space for a seven-byte descriptor by moving the variable storage area seven bytes higher in memory, and then creates the descriptor. 45445 $B185 FINPTR Return the Address of the Variable That Was Found or Created This routine stores the address of the variable that was found or created by the preceding routines in a pointer at 71-72 ($47-$48). 45460 $B194 ARYGET Allocate Space for Array Descriptors This routine allocates five bytes plus two bytes for every dimension specified for the array descriptor. 45477 $B1A5 N32768 The Constant -32768 in Five-Byte Floating Point Format This constant is used for range checking in the conversion of a floating point number to a signed integer (the minimum integer value is -32768). 45482 $B1AA Convert a Floating Point Number to a Signed Integer in .A and .Y Registers This subroutine calls AYINT, below, which checks to make sure that the number in the Floating Point Accumulator is between 32767 and -32768, and converts it to a 16-bit signed interger in 100-101 ($64-$65), high byte first. It leaves the high byte of the integer in the Accumulator, and the low byte in the .Y register. Although this routine does not appear to be referenced anywhere in BASIC, the vector at locations 3-4 points to its address. Presumably, it is provided for the benefit of the user who wishes to pass parameters in a USR call, or the like. 45490 $B1B2 INTIDX Input and Convert a Floating Point Subscript to a Positive Integer This routine converts a floating point subscript value to an integer, making sure first that it is positive. 105
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 45331
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B113
man: Page 119

---

nome: AYINT
descrizione: j | Convert a Floating Point Number to a Signed Integer ' — ' This subroutine first checks to make sure that the number in the Floating Point Accumulator is between 32767 and -32768. If it is \ j not, an ILLEGAL QUANTITY error results. If it is, the routine con- ' — ' U verts it to a 16-bit signed integer with the high byte in location 100 ($64), and the low byte in location 101 ($65). 45521 $B1D1 ISARY Find Array Element or Create New Array in RAM This routine searches for an array. If it is found, the subscript value is checked to see if it is valid, and pointers to the array and element of the array are set. If it is not found, the array is created, and the pointers set. 45637 $B245 BSERR Print BAD SUBSCRIPT Error Message 45640 $B248 FCERR Print ILLEGAL QUANTITY Error Message 45900 $B34C UMULT Compute the Size of a Multidimensional Array This routine calculates the size of a multidimensional array by multiplying the dimensions. 45949 $B37D FRE Perform FRE The FRE function calls the garbage collection routine at 46374 ($B526) to get rid of unused string text, and calculates the difference between the bottom of string text and the top of array storage. It then drops through to the following routine, which assumes that the \ ) free memory value is a signed 16-bit integer, and converts it to float- ' — ' ing point accordingly. Of course, while the free memory space on the PET might have i j always been 32767 or less (the maximum value of a signed integer), ( j such is definitely not the case on the 64. Because the conversion is from a signed integer, any memory value over 32767 will be regarded as negative (the high bit is treated as a sign bit). Therefore, for [ '. these higher values you must add twice the bit value of the high bit (65536) in order to come up with the correct value. The expression FRE (0)-65536*(FRE(0)<0) will always return the correct amount of I { free memory. ' — ' 106 U
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 45503
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B1BF
man: Page 120

---

nome: GIVAYF
descrizione: Convert 16-Bit Signed Integer to Floating Point This routine treats the value in the Accumulator as the high byte of a 16-bit signed integer, and the value in the .Y register as the low byte, and converts the signed integer into a floating point number in the Floating Point Accumulator. The address of this routine is pointed to by the RAM vector at 5-6, and the routine can be used to return an argument from the USR call in the Floating Point Accumulator. 45982 $B39E POS Perform POS The POS command calls the Kemal PLOT routine (58634, $E50A) to get the position of the cursor on the logical line. What it really does is an equivalent of PEEK (211). Remember, since we are dealing with a logical line, this number can be over 39. The statement "THIS SENTENCE IS LONGER THAN ONE PHYSICAL LINE";POS(X) will return a value of 48 for the POS(X). 45990 $B3A6 ERRDIR Check If the Program Is Running in Direct Mode, and If So Issue an Error This routine is called by statements that prohibit execution in direct mode. It checks a flag that is set when a line without a line number is entered, and causes an ILLEGAL DIRECT error if the flag is set. 46003 $B3B3 DEF Perform DEF DEF performs some syntax checking, and pushes five bytes onto the stack: the first byte of the function statement, a two-byte pointer to the dependent variable (the X in FN(X)), and the address of the first character of the definition itself, where it resides in program text. The DEF statement must fit on one line, but functions can be extended by nesting them (having one function call another). 46049 $B3E1 GETFNM Check DEF and FN Syntax This routine checks to make sure that FN follows DEF, and that the dependent variable has a valid floating point variable name. It calls the routine to find or create a variable to get the pointer to its address. 107
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 45969
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B391
man: Page 121

---

nome: FNDOER
descrizione: Perform FN The FN evaluation is done by evaluating the FN argument (for example, FN(A+B*C/D)) and then getting the rest of the expression \ j from the text of the function definition statement. The function vari- — able descriptor area is used as a work area, and the dependent variable is not disturbed (so that if the definition used FN(X), the value of X will not be changed by the function call). 46181 $B465 STRD Perform STR$ STR$ first checks to make sure that the parameter is a number, and then calls the routines that convert floating point to ASCII and create the pointers to a string constant. 46215 $B487 STRUT Scan and Set Up Pointers to a String in Memory This routine calculates the length of the string, and calls the routine that allocates space in memory. It then saves the string, or creates a pointer to its location in the BASIC text input buffer at 512 ($200). 46324 $B4F4 GETSPA Allocate Space in Memory for String The amount of space needed for a string is passed to this routine, and the routine checks if there is that amount of space available in free memory. If not, it does a garbage collection and tries again. 46374 $B526 GARBAG String Garbage Collection Whenever a string is changed in any way, the revised version of the text is added to the bottom of the string text area, leaving the old version higher up in memory, wasting space. In order to reclaim that space, the descriptor for every string j / whose text is in the string text area (rather than in the program text ' — * area) must be searched to find the valid text that is highest in memory. If that string is not as high as it could be, it is moved up to replace any string that is no longer valid. Then all of the string descriptors must be searched again to find the next highest string and move it up. This continues until every string that is in use has been covered. After all have been moved up, the pointer to the bottom of ( i string text at 51-52 ($33-$34) is changed to show the new bottom location. If there are more than a few strings whose text is in the string text storage area, rather than in the body of the program, scanning every string as many times as there are strings can take an awful lot 108 U
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 46068
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B3F4
man: Page 122

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Check for Most Eligible String to Collect This part of the garbage collection routine checks to see if the current string is the highest in memory. 46598 $B606 Collect a String This part of the garbage collection routine moves the string to high memory and updates the descriptor to point to its new location. 46653 $B63D CAT Concatenate Two Strings This routine is used to add the text of one string onto the end of another (A$-l-B$). Error checking is done to see if the length of the combined string is within range, the allocation routine is called to allocate space, and the new string is built at the bottom of the string text area. 46714 $B67A MOVINS Move a String In Memory This is the routine which is used to move a string to the bottom of the string text area for the above routine. It is generally used as a utility routine to move strings. n 46755 $B6A3 FRESTR Discard a Temporary String /— ) This routine calls the following routine which clears an entry from I 1 the temporary descriptor stack. If the descriptor was on the stack, it exits after setting pointers to the string and its length. If it wasn't on ^ the temporary stack and is at the bottom of string text storage, the j \ pointer to the bottom is moved up to deallocate the string. 46811 $B6DB FRETMS Remove an Entry from the String Descriptor Stack - - If the descriptor of a currently valid string is the same as one of the entries on the temporary string descriptor stack, the stack entry is removed. n 109
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 46525
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B5BD
man: Page 123

---

nome: CHRD
descrizione: Perform CHR$ The CHR$ routine creates a descriptor on the temporary string stack for the one-byte string whose value is specified in the command, and sets a pointer to that string. 46848 $B700 LEFTD Perform LEFT$ LEFTS creates a temporary string descriptor for a new string which contains the number of characters from the left side of the string that is specified in the command. 46892 $B72C RIGHTD Perform RIGHTS RIGHTS manipulates its parameters so that the tail end of LEFTS can be used to create a temporary string descriptor for a new string. This new string contains the number of characters from the right side of the string that is specified in the command. 46903 $B737 MIDD Perform MID$ MIDS manipulates its parameters so that the tail end of LEFTS can be used to create a temporary string descriptor for a new string. This new string contains the number of characters from the position in the middle of the string that is specified in the command. 46945 $B761 PREAM Pull string Function Parameters from Stack for LEFTS, RIGHTS, and MIDS This routine is used to obtain the first two parameters for all three of these commands. 46972 $B77C LEN Perform LEN The LEN function is performed by obtaining the string length from the descriptor and converting it to a floating point number. 46987 $B78B ASC Perform ASC This routine gets the first character of the string in the .Y register (if it's not a null string). Then it calls the part of POS that converts a one-byte integer in .Y to a floating point number. 110
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 46828
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B6EC
man: Page 124

---

nome: GETBYTC
descrizione: Input a Parameter Whose Value Is Between 0 and 255 This routine reads numeric ASCII program text, converts it to an integer, checks that it is in the range 0-255, and stores it in the .X register. This routine can be useful for reading parameters from a USR statement or new commands. 47021 $B7AD VAL Perform VAL The VAL routine obtains the string pointer, and reads the string one character at a time until an invalid character is found (ASCII numbers, sign character, a single decimal point, exponent, and spaces are all valid). Then the string is changed to floating point. If no valid characters are found, a 0 is returned. 47083 $B7EB GETNUM Get a 16-Bit Address Parameter and an 8-Bit Parameter (for POKE and WAIT) This routine gets the next numeric parameter from the current place in program text. The routine evaluates it, checks that it is a positive integer within the range 0-65535, and changes it from floating point to a two-byte integer in 20-21 ($14-$15). It checks for and skips a comma, then gets a one-byte integer parameter in the .X register. The routine is used to get the parameters for POKE and WAIT. 47095 $B7F7 GETADR Convert a Floating Point Number to an Unsigned Two-Byte Integer This routine checks the number in the Floating Point Accumulator to make sure that it is a positive number less than 65536, and then calls the subroutine which converts floating point to integer. It is used to get address parameters, for commands such as PEEK. 47117 $B80D PEEK Perform PEEK PEEK reads the address parameter and converts it to a pointer. Then it gets the byte pointed to into the .Y register, and calls the part of POS that converts a single integer in .Y to a floating point number. 47140 $B824 POKE Perform POKE POKE gets a pointer to the address parameter, and stores the next parameter there. Ill
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 47003
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B79B
man: Page 125

---

nome: FUWAIT
descrizione: Perform WAIT WAIT gets an address parameter and an integer parameter to use as a mask. WAIT then looks for an optional parameter to use as a pattern for the exclusive OR. Then, the address location is read, its value is exclusive ORed with the optional pattern value (or 0 if there is none). This value is ANDed with the mask value. The command loops continuously until the result is not-zero. The purpose of this command is to allow the program to watch a location which can be changed by the system or by outside hardware (such as the software clock or keycode value locations). The AND function lets you check if a bit changes from 0 to 1, while the EOR function allows you to check if a bit changes from 1 to 0. For more information see the article "All About the Wait Instruction," by Louis Sander and Doug Ferguson, in COMPUTEl's First Book of Commodore 64. 47177 $B849 FADDH Add .5 to Contents of Floating Point Accumulator #1 47184 $B850 FSUB Subtract FACl from a Number in Memory This routine is used to subtract the Floating Point Accumulator from a number in memory. It moves the number in memory into FAC2, and falls through to the next routine. 47187 $B853 FSUBT BASIC'S Subtraction Operation This routine subtracts the contents of FAC2 from FACl by complementing its sign and adding. 47207 $B867 FADD Add FACl to a Number in Memory This routine is used to add the contents of the Floating Point Accumulator (FACl) to a number in memory, by moving that number into FAC2, and falling through to the next routine. 47210 $B86A FADDT Perform BASIC'S Addition Operation This routine adds the contents of FACl and FAC2 and stores the results in FACl. 47271 $B8il7 FADD4 Make the Result Negative If a Borrow Was Done 112
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 47149
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B82D
man: Page 126

---

nome: NORMAL
descrizione: Normalize Floating Point Accumulator #1 47431 $B947 NEGFAC Replace FACl with Its 2's Complement 47486 $B97E OVERR Print Overflow Error Message 47491 $B983 MULSHF SHIFT Routine 47548 $B9BC FONE Floating Point Constant with a Value of 1 The five-byte floating point representation of the number 1 is stored here for use by the floating point routines. It is also used as the default STEP value for the FOR statement. 47553 $B9C1 LOGCN2 Table of Floating Point Constants for the LOG function This table of eight numeric constants in five-byte floating point representation is used by the LOG function. 47594 $B9EA LOG Perform LOG to Base E The LOG to the base e of the number in FACl is performed here, and the result left in FACl. 47656 $BA28 FMULT Multiply FACl by Value in Memory This routine is used to multiply the Floating Point Accumulator (FACl) by a number in memory. It moves the number in memory into FAC2, and falls through to the next routine. 47667 $BA33 FMULT Multiply FACl with FAC2 This routine multiplies the contents of FACl by the contents of FAC2 and stores the result in FACl. 47705 $BA59 MLTPLY Multiply a Byte Subroutine This subroutine is used to repetitively add a mantissa byte of FAC2 to FACl the number of times specified in the .A register.
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 47358
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B8FE
man: Page 127

---

nome: CONUPK
descrizione: Move a Floating Point Number from Memory into FAC2 This subroutine loads FAC2 from the four-byte number (three mantissa and one sign) pointed to by the .A and .Y registers. 47799 $BAB7 MULDIV Add Exponent of FACl to Exponent of FAC2 47828 $BAD4 MLDVEX Handle Underflow or Overflow 47842 $BAE2 MULIO Multiply FACl by 10 This subroutine is called to help convert a floating point number to a series of ASCII numerals. 47865 $BAF9 TENC The Constant 10 in Five-Byte Floating Format 47870 $BAFE DIVIO Divide FACl by 10 47887 $BBOF FDIV Divide a Number in Memory by FACl This number in memory is stored to FAC2, and this routine falls through to the next. 47890 $BB12 FDIVT Divide FAC2 by FACl This routine is used to divide the contents of FAC2 by the contents of FACl, with the result being stored in FACl. A check for division by 0 is made before dividing. 48034 $BBA2 MOVFM Move a Floating Point Number from Memory to FACl This routine loads FACl with the five-byte floating point number pointed to by the address stored in the Accumulator (low byte) and the .Y register (high byte). 48071 $BBC7 MOV2F Move a Floating Point Number from FACl to Memory This routine is used to move a number from the Floating Point Accumulator (FACl) to memory at either 92-96 ($5C-$60) or 87-91 ($57$5B), depending on the entry point to the routine. 114
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 47756
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $BA8C
man: Page 128

---

nome: MOVFA
descrizione: Move a Floating Point Number from FAC2 to FACl n 48140 $BCOC MOVAF Round and Move a Floating Point Number from FACl to FAC2 m 48143 $BCOF MOVEF '. i Copy FACl to FAC2 Without Rounding 48155 $BCIB ROUND Round Accumulator #1 by Adjusting the Rounding Byte If doubling the rounding byte at location 112 ($70) makes it greater than 128, the value of FACl is increased by 1. 48171 $BC2B SIGN Put the Sign of Accumulator #1 into .A Register On exit from this routine the Accumulator will hold a 0 if FACl is 0, a 1 if it is positive, and a value of 255 ($FF) if it is negative. 48185 $BC39 SGN Perform SGN The SGN routine calls the above routine to put the sign of FACl into .A, and then converts that value to a floating point number in FACl. 48216 $BC58 ABS Perform ABS The FACl sign byte at 102 ($66) is shifted right by this command, so that the top bit is a 0 (positive). ^ 48219 $BC5B FCOMP f [ Compare FACl to Memory On entry to this routine, .A and .Y point to a five-byte floating point ^^^^ number to be compared to FACl. After the comparison, .A holds a 0 if the two are equal, a 1 if the value of FACl is greater than that in the memory location, and 255 ($FF) if the value in FACl is less than that in the memory location. n 48283 $BC9B €aNT Convert FACl into Integer Within FACl /_ 1 This routine converts the value in FACl into a four-byte signed integer in 98-101 ($62-$65), with the most significant byte first. ( I 115
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 48124
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $BBFC
man: Page 129

---

nome: INT
descrizione: Perform INT This routine removes the fractional part of a floating point number by calling the routine above to change it to an integer, and then changing the integer back to floating point format. 48371 $BCF3 FIN Convert an ASCII String to a Floating Point Number FACl This routine is called by VAL to evaluate and convert an ASCII string to a floating point number. 48510 $BD7E FINLOG Add Signed Integer to FACl This routine is used to add an ASCII digit that has been converted to a signed integer to FACl. 48563 $BDB3 N0999 This table of three floating point constants holds the values 99,999,999.9, 999,999,999.5 and 1,000,000,000. These values are used in converting strings to floating point numbers. 48576 $BDCO INPRT Print IN Followed by a Line Number 48589 $BDCD LINPRT Output a Number in ASCII Decimal Digits This routine is used to output the line number for the routine above. It converts the number whose high byte is in .A and whose low byte is in .X to a floating point number. It also calls the routine below, which converts the floating point number to an ASCII string. 48605 $BDDD FOUT Convert Contents of FACl to ASCII String This routine converts a floating point number to a string of ASCII digits, and sets a pointer to the string in .A and .Y. 48913 $BF11 FHALF The Constant Value 1/2 in Five-Byte Floating Point Notation This constant is used for rounding and SQR. 48924 $BF1C FOUTBL Powers of Minus Ten Constants Table This table contains the powers of -10 expressed as four-byte floating point numbers (that is, -1; +10; -100; +1000; -10,000; +100,000; -1,000,000; +10,000,000; and -100,000,000). 116
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 48332
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $BCCC
man: Page 130

---

nome: FDCEND
descrizione: Table of Constants for TI$ Conversion This table contains the floating point representation of powers of -60 r~) multiplied by 1 or 10. These constants are used for converting TI$ to } ASCII. ^ 48978 $BF52 ; J Unused area This unused area is filled with bytes of 170 ($AA). 49009 $BF71 SGOI Perform SQR This routine moves the contents of FACl to FAC2, moves the constant 0.5 to FACl, and falls through to the exponentiation routine. 49019 $BF7B FPWRT Performs Exponentiation (Power Calculation Called for by UPARROW) This routine raises the value in FAC2 to the power in FACl and leaves the result in FACl. 49076 $BFB4 NEGOP Perform NOT and > This negates the Floating Point Accumulator by exclusive ORing the sign byte with a constant of 255 ($FF). Zero is left unchanged. The results of this command follow from the formula NOT X=-(X+1). Therefore, if you NOT a statement that is true (-1), you get 0 (false). 49087 $BFBF EXPCON Table of Constants for EXP and LOG in Five-Byte Floating Point Format These tables are used to calculate 2 to the N power. 49133 $BFED EXP Perform EXP This routine calculates the natural logarithm e (2.718281828...) raised to the power in FACl. The result is left in FACl. This routine is split between the BASIC ROM which ends at 49151 ($BFFF) and the Kemal ROM which begins at 57344 ($E000). Therefore, a JMP $E000 instruction is tacked on to the end, which makes the BASIC routines in the 64 Kemal ROM three bytes higher in memory than the corresponding VIC-20 routines. n 117
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 48954
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $BF3A
man: Page 131 49152-53247 4K Free RAM 49152-53247 ($COOO-$CFFF) Locations 49152 to 53247 ($C000 to $CFFF) are free RAM. Since this area is not contiguous with the BASIC program text RAM area, it is not available for BASIC program or variable storage (it is not counted in the FRE(O) total). This area is fully available for any other use, however, such as storing machine language subroutines for use with BASIC, alternate I/O drivers for parallel or IEEE devices, character graphics or sprite data, etc. This large free area is such a tempting spot for system additions that many such applications may be competing for the same RAM space. For example, the Universal Wedge DOS Support program that adds easy access to the disk communications channel is usually loaded at 52224 ($CCOO). Programs that use that part of RAM will therefore overwrite the DOS support program, with the result that they may not run correctly, or even at all. Likewise, Simon's BASIC, the extended language which Commodore has released on cartridge, uses several locations in this range. Be aware of this potential problem when you buy hardware additions that use this spot to hook into the system. 118 Page 132 Chapter 6 VIC-II, SID, I/O Devices, Color RAM, and Character ROM Page 133 The text on this page is estimated to be only 3.00% accurate □ y a P O u G U Q Page 134 - 53248-57343 G n VIC-II, SID, I/O 0 Devices, Color n RAM, and Character ROM 53248-57343 ($DOOO-$DFFF) This 4K block of memory is used for several key functions. Normally, the 6510 microprocessor addresses the two Complex Interface Adapter (CIA) Input/Output chips here, along with the VIC-II video controller chip, the Sound Interface Device (SID) music synthesizer, and the Color RAM. Alternatively, the 6510 can address the character ROM here (though normally only the VIC-II chip has access to it). Finally, there is also 4K of RAM here, although to use it may require banking it in only when necessary, as the I/O devices are needed for such niceties as reading the keyboard, and updating the screen display. It will appear from the map of the I/O devices below that many of the locations are not accounted for. That is because these devices tie up more addressing space than they actually use. Each of them uses only a few addresses, mostly on the bit level. The missing addresses either consist of images of the hardware registers, or cannot be addressed in this configuration. In addition, some address space is left open for the use of future hardware devices which might be plugged into the expansion port, like the CP/M card. m As mentioned above, memory usage by these I/O devices is so ' ^ intensive that to work with them often requires that you turn individual bits on and off. Here is a quick reminder of how to manipulate bits. ( i The bit values for each bit are: Bit 0=1, Bit 1=2, Bit 2=4, Bit 3=8, Bit 4=16, Bit 5=32, Bit 6=64, ^ Bit 7=128. ■ 3 To set a bit to 1 from BASIC, POKE address, PEEK (address) OR Bitvalue. To reset a bit to 0 from BASIC, POKE address, PEEK (address) AND 255-Bitvalue). I 1 121 / i Page 135 53248-53294 53248-53294 ($D000-$D02E) VIC-n Chip Registers The Video Interface Controller (VIC-II chip) is a specially designed processor that is in charge of the 64's video display. It is this chip which makes possible the 64's wide range of graphics capabilities. The VIC-II chip's ability to address memory is independent of the 6510 microprocessor. It can address only 16K at a time, and any of the four blocks of 16K can be chosen for video memory. The system default is for it to use the first 16K. All of the video display memory, character dot data, and sprite shapes must be stored within the chosen 16K block. Locations 53248-53294 ($D000-$D02E) are registers which allow the user to communicate with the VIC-II chip. Although for the most part they can be written to and read like ordinary memory locations, their contents directly control the video display. Since many of these locations work in close conjunction with others, a general overview of some of the different graphics systems on the 64 is in order. The most familiar type of graphics display is the ordinary text that appears when you turn the machine on. The area of RAM which is displayed on the screen is determined by the Video Matrix Base Address Nybble of the VIC-II Memory Control Register (53272, $D018). The address of the dot-data which is used to assign a shape to each text character based on an 8 by 8 matrix of lit or unlit dots is determined by the other half of the Memory Control Register at 53272 ($D018). More information on how the data is used to represent the character shapes may be foimd at the alternate entry for 53248 ($D000), the Character Generator ROM. Text character graphics may employ one of the two sets of text and graphics characters in the Character Generator ROM, or the user may substitute a completely different set of graphics or text characters in RAM. Normally, the text graphics screen uses a background color which is common to all text characters, and that value is stored in Background Color Register 0 (53281, $D021). The color of the frame around the screen is determined by the Border Color Register at 53280 ($D020). The color of each character is determined by one nybble of the Color RAM which starts at 55296 ($D800). There are, however, two variations which alter this scheme somewhat. The first is called multicolor text mode, and is set by Bit 4 of 53270 ($D016). Instead of each bit selecting either the foreground or the background color for each dot in the character, bit-pairs are used to select one of four colors for each double-width dot. This results in the horizontal resolution being cut to four dots across per character, but allows two extra colors to be introduced from Background Color Registers 1 and 2 (53282-53283, $D022-$D023). 122 Page 136 5324S-53294 The other text mode is called Extended Background Color Mode. _J In this mode, the foreground color is always selected by the Color RAM. The background color depends on the actual screen code of ^ the character. In this mode, only the first 64 character shapes are I I available, but each can have one of four different background colors. The background color for each character is determined by its ^ screen code as follows: It 1. If the screen code is from 0-63 (this includes the normal alphanumerics), the value in Background Color Register 0 (53281, #D021) will determine the background color, as is usual. 2. Characters with codes 63-255 will have the same shape as the corresponding character in the group with codes 0-63. 3. For characters with codes 63-127 (SHIFTed characters), the background colors are determined by the value in Background Color Register 1 (53282, $D022). 4. The value in Background Color Register 2 (53283, $D023) is used for characters with codes 128-191 (reversed alphanumerics). 5. For characters with codes 192-255, the value in Background Color Register 3 (53284, $D024) is used to determine the background color. In place of the normal text mode, a bitmap graphics mode is also available by setting Bit 5 of location 53265 ($D011). In this mode, each bit of data determines whether one dot on the screen will be set to either the background color or foreground color. Within an 8 by 8 dot area, the foreground and background colors may be individually selected. The bitmap area is 320 dots wide and 200 dots high. The area which contains the graphics data, the bitmap is determined by the Character Dot Data Base Address in the lower nybble of the VIC-II Memory Control Register (53272, $D018). The Video Matrix Base Address in the upper nybble, which normally determines which area of memory will be displayed, instead determines where the color memory for each 8 by 8 group of dots will be located. The Color RAM is not used for high-resolution bitmap graphics. But multicolor mode is also available for bitmap graphics, and it uses the Color RAM to determine the foreground color of each dot. As with multicolor text mode, the horizontal resolution is cut in half (to 160 dots across), so that in addition to the foreground and background colors, each dot can be one of two other colors as well. This mode gets the value for the two extra colors from the two nybbles of each byte of bitmap color memory, the location of which is determined by the Video Matrix Base Address. Multicolor text mode offers four colors, three of which will be common to all characters, and one of which can be selected individually. Multicolor bitmap mode offers a choice of four colors, three of 123 Page 137 53248-53294 u which can be individually selected within an 8 by 8 dot area. ^ | The 64 also contains an entirely separate graphics system, * — ' whose character shapes, colors, and positions are derived and displayed without any reference to the Video Matrix and Character i i Dot-Data addresses. Best of all, these characters may be moved quickly and easily to any position on the screen, greatly facilitating games and animated graphics of all tj^es. This system is known as sprite graphics. [ j Sprite graphics takes its name from the graphics characters it displays, each of which is called a sprite. There are eight sprites, known as Sprites 0-7. Each sprite character is 24 dots wide by 21 dots high. This is about eight times as large as a regular text character, which is only 8 dots wide by 8 dots high. A sprite takes its shape from 63 bytes of data in one of the 256 data blocks, each 64 bytes long, that can fit into the 16K space which the VIC-II chip can address. The block currently assigned to any given sprite is determined by the Sprite Data Pointers, which are located at the last eight bytes of the screen memory area (the default locations are 2040-2047, $7F8-$7FF). The first Sprite Data Pointer determines the data block used for the shape of Sprite 0, the second for the shape of Sprite 1, etc. The number in the pointer times 64 equals the address of the first byte of the data block within the VIC-Il addressing range. For example, using the default values for VIC-II addressing area and screen memory, a value of 11 in location 2040 ($7F8) would mean that the shape of Sprite 0 is determined by the data in the 63byte block starting at location 704 (11*64). It should be noted that it is possible for more than one sprite to take its shape data from the same block, so that only 64 bytes of data are required to create eight sprites, each having the same shape. The dot patterns of each sprite correspond to the bit patterns of the sprite shape data. Each byte of shape data in memory consists of a number from 0 to 255. This number can be represented by eight binary digits of 0 or 1. ] j Each binary digit has a bit value that is two times greater than — ' the last. If the digit in the zero bit place is a 1, it has a value of 1 (we count bit places firom 0 to 7). A 1 in the first bit place has a val- i , ue of 2, the second bit has a value of 4, the third has a value of 8, the fourth has a value of 16, the fifth a value of 32, the sixth a value of 64, and the seventh a value of 128. By making all of the possible combinations of O's and I's in all Ij eight bit places, and adding the bit values of every bit place that contains a 1, we can represent every number from 0 to 255 as a series of I's and O's. If you think of every 0 as a dot having the same color as the background, and every 1 as a dot which is the color of the sprite. 124 u Page 138 53248-53294 you can see how a series of bytes could be used to represent the sprite shape. Since each line of the sprite is 24 dots wide, it takes 3 bytes of memory (24 bits) per line to portray its shape. Let's take a look at a couple of sample sprite lines. 00000000 01111110 00000000 =0,126,0 As you can see, the first and last bytes are all O's, so nothing will be displayed there. The middle byte has six I's, so it will be displayed as a line six dots long. By adding the values of these six bits (64+32+16+8+4+2), we get a byte value of 126. Let's try another line. 00011111 11111111 11111000 =31,255,248 The first byte has five bits set to 1, having values of 16, 8, 4, 2, and 1, for a total value of 31. The second byte has all bits set to 1, so it has the maximum value of 255. The third byte also has five bits set to 1, having values of 128, 64, 32, 16, and 8, for a total of 248. The result is that this line of sprite data will display a line that is 18 dots long. We can put these two kinds of lines together to show how a large ctoss might be drawn using bytes of sprite data. 000000000000000000000000 =0,0,0 000000000000000000000000 =0,0,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0, 126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 =0,126,0 0000000001 1 1111 000000000 = 0, 126,0 0000000001 1 1111 000000000 = 0, 126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 000111111111111111111000 =31,255,248 000111111111111111111000 =31,255,248 000111111111111111111000 =31,255,248 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 =0,126,0 000000000111111000000000 =0,126,0 000000000111111000000000 =0,126,0 000000000 1 1 1 1 1 1 000000000 = 0, 1 26,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 =0,126,0 000000000000000000000000 =0,0,0 000000000000000000000000 =0,0,0 The 63 numbers, displayed three per line opposite the bit patterns they represent, are the values that would have to be put in the sprite shape data area in order to display this cross using sprite graphics. Page 139 53248-53294 Even after the sprite shape data has been placed in memory, and the Sprite Data Pointer has been set to display that block of data bytes as the sprite shape, there are still several steps that must be taken in order to display the sprite on the screen. The proper bit of the Sprite Display Enable Register at 53269 ($D015) must be set to 1 in order to turn on the sprite display. A horizontal and vertical screen position must be selected for the sprite by means of the horizontal and vertical position registers (5324853264, $D000-$D010). Finally, the color value of the sprite should be placed in the appropriate Sprite Color Register (53287-53294, $D027-$D02E). Once you have the sprite on the screen, animation is fairly simple to achieve. Moving the sprite is as easy as changing the values in the sprite position registers. Changing the sprite shape can be accomplished by merely changing the Sprite Data Pointer to point to another block of shape data in memory. There are also some optional sprite graphics features available which enhance its flexibility. Sprite expand registers allow you to make each sprite twice as wide as normal, twice as tall, or both. Collision detection registers let you know when a sprite shape overlaps a regular text character or bitmap dot, or if two sprites are touching. If a sprite is positioned in the same place on the screen as a text character or bitmap dot, a Priority Register allows you to choose whether the sprite or the normal graphics will be displayed. This enables three-dimensional effects by letting you choose whether the sprite goes in front of or behind other objects on the screen. Finally, any sprite may be selected for multicolor display, using the register at location 53276 ($D01C). In this mode, as in multicolor text and bitmap modes, pairs of bits are used to determine the color of each double-width dot. The possible color values which may be selected are those of Background Color Register 0, the Sprite Color Register, or the two color values in the Sprite Multicolor Registers at 53285-53286 ($D025-$D026). Location Range: 53248-53264 ($D000$D010) Sprite Horizontal and Vertical Position Registers These locations determine the horizontal and vertical position at which each sprite will be displayed on the screen. Each sprite has its own horizontal and vertical position register. In addition, all of the sprites share a common register which is used to extend the range of horizontal positions. Vertical positions for each sprite range from 0 to 255, and these indicate the vertical position of the top line of the sprite's 21 -line length. Since there are only 200 visible scan lines in the screen dis126 Page 140

---
