# Category: CIA1

nome: TIMALO
descrizione: 56325 Timer
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 56324
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $DC04
man: A (high byte) $DC05 TIMAHI 56326 Timer B (low byte) $DC06 TIMBLO 56327 Timer B (high byte) $DC07 TIMBHI Location Range: 56328-56331 ($DC08$DCOB) Time of Day Clock (TOD) In addition to the two general-purpose timers, the 6526 CIA chip has a special-purpose Time of Day Clock, which keeps time in a format that humans can understand a little more easily than miaoseconds. This Time of Day Clock even has an alarm, which can cause an interrupt at a specific time. It is organized in four registers, one each for hours, minutes, seconds, and tenths of seconds. Each register reads out in Binary Coded Decimal (BCD) format, for easier conversion to ASCII digits. A BCD byte is divided into two nybbleS, each . of which represents a single digit in base 10. Even though a four-bit nybble can hold a number from 0 to 15, only the base 10 digits of 09 are used. Therefore, 10 o'clock would be represented by a hyte in the hours register with the nybbles 0001 and 0000, which stand for the digits 1 and 0. The binary value of this byte would be 16 (16 times the high nybble plus the low nybble). Each of the other registers operates in the same manner. In addition. Bit 7 of the hours register is used as an AM/PM flag. If that bit is set to 1, it indicates PM, and if it is set to 0, the time is AM. The Time of Day Clock Registers can be used for two purposes, depending on whether you are reading them or writing to them. If you are reading them, you will always be reading the time. There is a latching feature associated with reading the hours register in order to solve the problem of the time changing while you are reading the registers. For example, if you were reading the hours register just as the time was changing from 10:59 to 11:00, it is possible that you would read the 10 in the hours register, and by the time you read the minutes register it would have changed from 59 to 00. Therefore, you would read 10:00 instead of either 10:59 or 11:00. To prevent this kind of mistake, the Time of Day Clock Registers stop updating as soon as you read the hours register, and do not start again until you read the tenths of seconds register. Of course. 180 56328-56331 the clock continues to keep time internally even though it does not update the registers. If you want to read only minutes, or seconds or tenths of seconds, there is no problem, and no latching will occur. But anytime you read hours, you must follow it by reading tenths of seconds, even if you don't care about them, or else the registers will not continue to update. Writing to these registers either sets the time or the alarm, depending on the setting of Bit 7 of Conb:ol Register B (56335, $DCOF). If that bit is set to 1, writing to the Time of Day registers sets the alarm. If the bit is set to 0, writing to the Time of Day registers sets the Time of Day clock. In either case, as with reading the registers, there is a latch function. This function stops the clock from updating when you write to the hours register. The clock will not start again until you write to the tenths of seconds registers. The only apparent use of the Time of Day Clock by the 64's Operating System is in the BASIC RND statement. There, the seconds and tenths of seconds registers are read and their values used as part of the seed value for the RND(O) command. Nonetheless, this clock can be an invaluable resource for the 64 user. It will keep time more accurately than the software clock maintained at locations 160-162 ($A0-$A2) by the Timer A interrupt routine. And unlike that software clock, the Time of Day Clock will not be disturbed when I/O operations disrupt the Timer A IRQ, or when the IRQ vector is diverted elsewhere. Not even a cold start RESET will disrupt the time. For game timers, just set the time for 00:00:00:0 and it will keep track of elapsed time in hours, minutes, seconds and tenths of seconds format. The following digital clock program, written in BASIC, will demonstrate the use of these timers: 10 PRINT CHR$(147) :GOSUB 200 20 H=PEEK( 56331 ): POKE 1238, (H AND 16)/l6+48:POKE 1 239, (H AND 15)+ 48 30 M-PEEK( 56330 ): POKE 1241, (M AND 240 )/16+48: POKE {SPACE}1242, (M AND 15)+ 48 40 S=PEEK( 56329 ): POKE 1244, (S AND 240 )/l6+48t POKE {SPACE}1245, (S AND 15)+ 48 50 T=PEEK(56328)AND15:POKE 1 247, T+48: GOTO 20 200 INPUT"WHAT IS THE HOUR";H$:IP H$=""THEN 200 210 H=0:IF LEN(H$)>1 THEN H=16 220 HH=VAL ( RIGHT? ( H$ , 1 ) ) : H=H+HH : POKE563 3 1 , H 230 INPUT "WHAT IS THE MINUTE" ;M$ : IF M$=""THEN 200 240 M=0:IF LEN(M$)>1 THEN M=16*VAL(LEFT$(M$, 1) ) 250 MM=VAL(RIGHT$(M$,1) ) :M=M+MM: POKE56330,M 260 INPUT "WHAT IS THE SECOND" ; S$ : IF S$=""THEN 200 270 S=0:IP LEN(S$)>1 THEN S=16*VAL(LEFT$(S$, 1) ) 280 SS=VAL(RIGHT$(S$,1) ) :S=S+SSiPOKE56329,S:POKE 5 6328,0 181 56328 290 POKE 53281, 1:PRINTCHR$( 147 ): POKE 53281,6 300 POKE 1240>58:POKE 1243,58:POKE 1246,58:GOTO 20 56328 $DC08 TODTEN Time of Day Clock Tenths of Seconds Bits 0-3: Time of Day tenths of second digit (BCD) Bits 4-7: Unused 56329 $DC09 TODSEC Time of Day Clock Seconds Bits 0-3: Second digit of Time of Day seconds (BCD) Bits 4-6: First digit of Time of Day seconds (BCD) Bit 7: Unused 56330 $DCOA TODMIN Time of Day Clock Minutes Bits 0-3: Second digit of Time of Day minutes (BCD) Bits 4-6: First digit of Time of Day minutes (BCD) Bit 7: Unused 56331 $DCOB TODHRS Time of Day Clock Hours Bits 0-3: Second digit of Time of Day hours (BCD) Bit 4: First digit of Time of Day hours (BCD) Bits 5-6: Unused Bit 7: AM/PM Hag (1=PM, 0=AM) 56332 $DCOC CIASDR Serial Data Port The CIA chip has an on-chip serial port, which allows you to send or receive a byte of data one bit at a time, with the most significant bit (Bit 7) being transferred first. Control Register A at 56334 ($DCOE) allows you to choose input or output modes. In input mode, a bit of data is read from the SP line (pin 5 of the User Port) whenever a signal on the CNT line (pin 4) appears to let you know that it is time for a read. After eight bits are received this way, the data is placed in the Serial Port Register, and an interrupt is generated to let you know that the register should be read. In output mode, you write data to the Serial Port Register, and it is sent out over the SP line (pin 5 of the User Port), using Timer A for the baud rate generator. Whenever a byte of data is written to this register, transmission will start as long as Timer A is running and in continuous mode. Data is sent at half the Timer A rate, and an output will appear on the CNT line (pin 4 of the User Port) 182 56333 whenever a bit is sent. After all eight bits have been sent, an interrupt is generated to indicate that it is time to load the next byte to send into the Serial Register. The Serial Data Register is not used by the 64, which does all of its serial I/O through the regular data ports. 56333 $DCOD CIAICR Interrupt Control Register Bit 0: Read/ did Timer A count down to 0? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable Timer A interrupt (l=enable, 0= disable) Bit 1: Read/ did Timer B count down to 0? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable Timer B interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 2: Read/ did Time of Day Clock reach the alarm time? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable TOD clock alarm interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 3: Read/ did the serial shift register finish a byte? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable serial shift register interrupt ( 1 = enable, 0 = disable) Bit 4: Read/ was a signal sent on the flag line? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable FLAG line interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 5: Not used Bit 6: Not used Bit 7: Read/ did any CIA #1 source cause an interrupt? (l=yes) Write/set or clear bits of this register (l=bits written with 1 will be set, 0=bits written with 1 will be cleared) This register is used to control the five interrupt sources on the 6526 CIA chip. These sources are Timer A, Timer B, the Time of Day Clock, the Serial Register, and the FLAG line. Timers A and B cause an interrupt when they count down to 0. The Time of Day Clock generates an interrupt when it reaches the ALARM time. The Serial Shift Register interrupts when it compiles eight bits of input or output. An external signal pulling the CIA hardware line called FLAG low will also cause an interrupt (on CIA #1, this FLAG line is connected to the Cassette Read line of the Cassette Port). Even if the condition for a particular interrupt is satisfied, the interrupt must still be enabled for an IRQ actually to occur. This is done by writing to the Interrupt Control Register. What happens when you write to this register depends on the way that you set Bit 7. If it is set to 0, any other bit that is written to with a 1 will be cleared, and the corresponding interrupt will be disabled. If you set Bit 7 to 1, any bit written to with a 1 will be set, and the corresponding interrupt will be enabled. In either case, the interrupt enable flags for those bits written to with a 0 will not be affected. 183 56334 For example, in order to disable all interrupts from BASIC, you could POKE 56333,127. This sets Bit 7 to 0, which clears all of the other bits, since they are all written with I's. Don't try this from BASIC immediate mode, as it will turn off Timer A which causes the IRQ for reading the keyboard, so that it will in effect turn off the keyboard. To turn on the Timer A interrupt, a program could POKE 56333,129. Bit 7 is set to 1 and so is Bit 0, so the interrupt which corresponds to Bit 0 (Timer A) is enabled. When you read this register, you can tell if any of the conditions for a CIA interrupt were satisfied because the corresponding bit will be set to a 1. For example, if Timer A counts down to 0, Bit 0 of this register will be set to 1. If, in addition, the mask bit that corresponds to that interrupt source is set to 1, and an interrupt occurs, Bit 7 will also be set. This allows a multi-interrupt system to read one bit and see if the source of a particular interrupt was CIA #1. You should note, however, that reading this register clears it, so you should preserve its contents in RAM if you want to test more than one bit. 56334 $DCOE CIACRA Control Register A Bit 0: Start Timer A (1= start, O=stop) Bit 1: Select Timer A output on Port B (1= Timer A output appears on Bit 6 of Port B) Bit 2: Port B output mode (l=toggle Bit 6, 0=pulse Bit 6 for one cycle) Bit 3: Timer A run mode (1= one-shot, 0= continuous) Bit 4: Force latched value to be loaded to Timer A counter (1= force load strobe) Bit 5: Timer A input mode (1= count microprocessor cycles, 0= count signals on CNT line at pin 4 of User Port) Bit 6: Serial Port (56332, $DCOC) mode (l=ou^ut, 0= input) Bit 7: Time of Day Clock frequency (1=50 Hz required on TOD pin, 0 = 60 Hz) Bits 0-3. This nybble controls Timer A. Bit 0 is set to 1 to start the timer counting down, and set to 0 to stop it. Bit 3 sets the timer for one-shot or continuous mode. In one-shot mode, the timer counts down to 0, sets the counter value back to the latch value, and then sets Bit 0 back to 0 to stop the timer. In continuous mode, it reloads the latch value and starts all over again. Bits 1 and 2 allow you to send a signal on Bit 6 of Data Port B when the timer counts. Setting Bit 1 to 1 forces this output (which overrides the Data Direction Register B Bit 6, and the normal Data Port B value). Bit 2 allows you to choose the form this output to Bit 6 of Data Port B will take. Setting Bit 2 to a value of 1 will cause Bit 184 56335 6 to toggle to the opposite value when the timer runs down (a value of 1 will change to 0, and a value of 0 will change to 1). Setting Bit 2 to a value of 0 will cause a single pulse of a one machine-cycle duration (about a millionth of a second) to occur. Bit 4. This bit is used to load the Timer A counter with the value that was previously written to the Timer Low and High Byte Registers. Writing a 1 to this bit will force the load (although there is no data stored here, and the bit has no significance on a read). Bit 5. Bit 5 is used to control just what it is Timer A is counting. If this bit is set to 1, it counts the microprocessor machine cycles (which occur at the rate of 1,022,730 cycles per second). If the bit is set to 0, the timer counts pulses on the CNT line, which is connected to pin 4 of the User Port. This allows you to use the CIA as a frequency counter or an event counter, or to measure pulse width or delay times of external signals. Bit 6. Whether the Serial Port Register is currently inputting or outputting data (see the entry for that register at 56332, $DCOC for more information) is controlled by this bit. Bit 7. This bit allows you to select from software whether the Time of Day Clock will use a 50 Hz or 60 Hz signal on the TOD pin in order to keep accurate time (the 64 uses a 60 Hz signal on that pin). 56335 $DCOF CIACRB Control Register B Bit 0: Start Timer B (l=start, O=stop) Bit 1: Select Timer B output on Port B (l=Timer B output appears on Bit 7 of Port B) Bit 2: Port B output mode (l=toggle Bit 7, 0=pulse Bit 7 for one cycle) Bit 3: Timer B run mode (1= one-shot, 0= continuous) Bit 4: Force latched value to be loaded to Timer B counter (1 =force load strobe) Bits 5-6: Timer B input mode 00 = Timer B counts microprocessor cycles 01 = Count signals on CNT line at pin 4 of User Port 10 = Count each time that Timer A counts down to 0 11 = Count Timer A O's when CNT pulses are also present Bit 7: Select Time of Day write (0=vmting to TOD registers sets alarm, 1= writing to TOD registers sets clock) Bits 0-3. This nybble performs the same functions for Timer B that Bits 0-3 of Control Register A perform for Timer A, except that Timer B output on Data Port B appears at Bit 7, and not Bit 6. Bits 5 and 6. These two bits are used to select what Timer B counts. If both bits are set to 0, Timer B counts the microprocessor 185 56335 U U machine cycles (which occur at the rate of 1,022,730 cycles per sec- j j end). If Bit 6 is set to 0 and Bit 5 is set to 1, Timer B counts pulses — ' on the CNT line, which is connected to pin 4 of the User Port. If Bit 6 is set to 1 and Bit 5 is set to 0, Timer B counts Timer A underflow \ | pulses, which is to say that it counts the number of times that Timer i — i A counts down to 0. This is used to link the two timers into one 32bit timer that can count up to 70 minutes with accuracy to within 1/15 second. Finally, if both bits are set to 1, Timer B counts the num- \ ' ber of times that Timer A counts down to 0 and there is a signal on the CNT line (pin 4 of the User Port). Bit 7. Bit 7 controls what happens when you write to the Time of Day registers. If this bit is set to 1, writing to the TOD registers sets the ALARM time. If this bit is cleared to 0, writing to the TOD registers sets the TOD clock. Location Range: 56336-56575 ($DC10$DCFF) CIA #1 Register Images Since the CIA chip requires only enough addressing lines to handle 16 registers, none of the higher bits are decoded when addressing the 256-byte area that has been assigned to it. The result is that every 16-byte area in this 256-byte block is a mirror of every other. Even so, for the sake of clarity in your programs it is advisable to use the base address of the chip, and not use higher addresses to communicate with the chip. Complex Interface Adapter (CIA) #2 Registers Locations 56576-56591 ($DD00-$DD0F) are used to address the Complex Interface Adapter chip #2 (CIA #2). Since the chip itself is identical to CIA #1, which is addressed at 56320 ($DCOO), the dis- j { cussion here will be limited to the use which the 64 makes of this particular chip. For more general information on the chip registers, please see the corresponding entries for CIA #1. \ I One of the significant differences between CIA chips #1 and #2 ' — ' is the use to which Data Ports A and B are put. The peripheral input and output devices that CIA #2 controls are those on the Serial Bus i / (such as the 1541 Disk Drive and 1525 printer), the RS-232 device LJ (which is used for telecommunications), and the User Port, an eightbit parallel port that can be turned to whatever purpose the user desires. In addition. Data Port A has the important task of selecting \ the 16K bank of memory that will be used by the VIC-II chip for graphics. 186 ! 1 n 1 1 n 56576-56577 Another significant difference between CIA chips #1 and #2 is that the interrupt line of CIA #1 is wired to the 6510 IRQ line, while that of CIA #2 is wired to the NMI line. This means that interrupts from this chip cannot be masked by setting the Interrupt disable flag (SEI). They can be disabled from CIA's Mask Register, though. Be sure to use the NMI vector when setting up routines to be driven by interrupts generated by this chip. Location Range: 56576-56577 ($DDOO$DD01) CIA #2 Data Ports A and B These registers are where the communication with the Serial Bus, RS-232 device, and User Port take place. The Serial Bus is like the IEEE bus which is used by the PET, in that it allows more than one device to be connected to the port at a time, in a daisychain arrangement. Since each byte of data is sent one bit at a time, however, the Serial Bus is at least eight times slower than the IEEE. It is presently used to control the 1541 Disk Drive and 1525 printer, and other devices (such as printer interfaces for Centronics-type parallel printers and stringy floppy wafer tape storage units) can be placed on this bus. Data Port A is used for communication with the Serial Bus. Bits 5 and 7 are used for Serial Bus Data Output and Input respectively, and Bits 4 and 6 are used for the Serial Bus Clock Pulse Output and Input. Bit 3 of Data Port A is used to send the ATN signal on the Serial Bus. The 64 has built-in software to handle RS-232 communications through a modem or other device plugged in the RS-232/User Port. The RS-232 device uses Bit 2 of Data Port A for data output (it is the only line from Port A that is connected to the RS-232/User Port jack). It also makes heavy use of Port B, using Bit 7 for the Data Set Ready (DSR) signal. Bit 6 for the Clear to Send (CTS), Bit 4 for the Carrier Detect (DCD), Bit 3 for the Ring Indicator (RI), Bit 2 for Data Terminal Ready (DTR), Bit 1 for Request to Send (RTS), and Bit 0 for data input. See locations 659-660 ($293-$294) for more details on tiie RS-232 device. All of the data lines which the RS-232 device uses are also available to the user as part of the User Port. All of the Port B data lines, and Bit 2 of Port A, are brought out to the User Port connector on the back of the 64. These data bits are utilized in the normal way: The port connections are made to TTL-level input or output devices, and the direction of data is determined by the Data Direction J"! registers. In addition, the User Port has pins connected to the two CIA Serial Ports (whose eight-bit shift registers are well-suited for serial187 5657656577 to-parallel and parallel-to-serial conversion), and the two CNT lines which aid in the operation of the Serial Ports. The CNT lines can also be used in conjunction with the CIA Timers, and allow them to be used as frequency counters, event counters, interval timers, etc. The advanced features of the CIA chip make almost any type of interfacing application possible, and in the near future we will probably see many interesting applications for tfhe User P{»t on the 64. A pin description of the User Port connector is provided below: User Port CIA Pin Line 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 A B C D F H J K L M N CNTl SPl CNT2 SP2 PC2 RS-232 DB-25 Pin 1 FLAG2 PBO 3 PBl 4 PB2 20 PB3 22 PB4 8 PBS PB6 5 PB7 6 PA2 2 7 Description Ground -f 5 Volts (100 milliamps maximum) RESET (grounding this pin causes a cold start) CIA #1 Serial Port and Timer Counter CIA #1 Serial Data Port CIA #2 Serial Port and Timer Counter CIA #2 Serial Data Port CIA #2 handshaking line Connected to the ATN line of the Serial Bus 9 Volts AC (+phase, 50 milliamps maximum) 9 Volts AC (-phase, 50 milliamps maximum) Ground Ground CIA#2 handshaking line Port B Bit 0— RS-232 Received Data (SIN) Port B Bit 1— RS-232 Request to Send (RTS) Port B Bit 2— RS-232 Data Terminal Ready (DTR) Port B Bit 3— RS-232 Ring Indicator (RI) Port B Bit 4— RS-232 Carrier Detect (DCD) Port B Bit 5 Port B Bit 6— RS-232 Clear to Send (CTS) Port B Bit 7— RS-232 Data Set Ready (DSR) Port A Bit 2— RS-232 Transmitted Data (Sout) Ground 188 5657656577 One of the handshaking lines on the above chart, PC2, was not covered in the discussion of CIA #1, because that line of CIA #1 is not connected to anything. The CIA #2 PC line is accessible from the I—) User Port, however. This line will go low for one cycle following a ' \ read or write of Port B on CIA #2. This signal lets external devices know when data has been read or written. ^ Bits 0 and 1 of CIA #2 Port A have an extremely important / ( function. As mentioned in the section on the VIC -II chip (53248, $D000), the video chip can address only 16K of memory at a time, and all graphics data must be stored in that 16K block in order to be displayed. Within this area, sprite graphics data may be placed in any of 256 groups of 64 bytes each. Character data can be stored in any of eight 2K blocks. Text screen memory may be in any of 16 IK areas, and bitmap screen memory may be in either of two 8K sections. When you turn the power on, the VIC-II uses the bottom 16K of memory for graphics. Unfortunately, this block of memory is also ' used extensively for other important purposes. Though some means of eliminating these conflicts are discussed above, in many situations you will want to change from the default 16K bank at the low end of memory. Bits 0 and 1 select the current 16K bank for video memory from the four possible choices using the following bit patterns: 00 (bit value of 0) Bank 3 (49152-65535, $COOO-$FFFF) 01 (bit value of 1) Bank 2 (32768-49151, $8000-$BFFF) 10 (bit value of 2) Bank 1 (16384-32767, $4000-$7FFF) 11 (bit value of 3) Bank 0 (0-16383, $0-$3FFF) The technique for making this change from BASIC is discussed below. But before we go ahead and start changing banks, let's briefly review the contents of these areas, and the considerations for using them for graphics. Block 0. This is normally used for system variables and BASIC f-| program text. Locations 1024-2048 ($400-$800) are reserved for the I _ I default position of screen memory. There is an additional limitation on memory usage of this block, ^ as the VIC-II sees the character generator ROM at 4096-8191 ($1000) I $1FFF), making this portion of memory unavailable for other graphics data. Generally, there is little free space here for graphics display data. Locations 679-767 ($2A7-$2FF) are unused, and could hold one P7 sprite shape (number 11) or data for 11 characters. The area from ' ■ 820-1023 ($334-$3FF), which includes the cassette I/O buffer, is available for graphics memory, and is large enough to hold three r-1 sprite shapes (numbers 13, 14, and 15), or data for 25 characters r_ } (numbers 103-127). But getting enough memory for bitmap graphics requires that you either reserve memory after the end of BASIC text 189 56576-56577 by lowering the end of BASIC pointer at 56 ($38), or raise the start of BASIC pointer at 44 ($2C). See the entries for these pointers for more details. Block 1. Block 1 is normally used for BASIC program storage. When using this bank, the VIC-II chip does not have access to the character generator ROM. Providing that you lower the top of memory so that BASIC programs do not interfere, this area is vnde open for sprite shapes, character graphics, and bitmap graphics. The drawbacks to using this bank are the unavailability of the character ROM and the limitation on BASIC program space (as little as 14K). The absence of the character ROM is a relatively minor nuisance, because you can always switch in the ROM and copy any or all of the characters to RAM (see the entries for location 1 and the alternate entry for 53248, $D000, the Character ROM, for details). This block may be a good alternate choice to avoid potential conflicts with other applications that use higher memory. Block 2. The third block (Block 2) consists of 8K of RAM, half of which is seen by the VIC-II chip as character ROM, and the 8K BASIC interpreter ROM. The BASIC ROM area is available for graphics. This is possible because of the 64's special addressing. The VIC-II chip reads only from RAM, and thus sees the RAM underneath the BASIC ROM even if the 6510 has ROM switched in. The 6510, on the other hand, always writes to RAM, even when dealing with memory it reads as ROM. Whatever is written to the RAM underlying the BASIC ROM is displayed normally by the VIC-II chip. This opens up an extra 8K area for sprites and character data under the BASIC ROM. You should keep in mind that while you can write to this area, you cannot read it from BASIC. This may not be a serious problem when it comes to character sets and sprite data, but it's more of a drawback if you want to use this RAM for screen memory. For example, the Operating System has to read the text screen to move the cursor properly, and if it reads the ROM value instead of the RAM screen data, it gets hopelessly confused, making it impossible to type in any commands. Likewise, you would not be able to read the high-resolution screen if it were placed here, without some machine language trickery. With locations 36864-40959 ousted by the character ROM, only 4K of true RAM remains for use as screen memory, not enough for a complete high-resolution screen. Therefore, this block is not recommended for use in bitmap mode if your program needs to check the screen. Otherwise, this is a good place for graphics memory, particulariy if you need to emulate the screen configuration of the PET. Block 3. Normally Block 3 contains 4K of RAM that is completely unused by the system, 4K of I/O registers, and the 8K Operating System Kemal ROM. It is very convenient to use when you need a 190 56576-56577 lot of memory space for both graphics and a BASIC program. Although the character ROM is not available, it can be copied to RAM. The area under the Kemal ROM can be used as explained above, r— I One possible conflict that you should be aware of is that the current i i version of the DOS support program is written to reside at 52224 ($CCOO). It would be safest to avoid using 52224-53247 for graphics ^ if you plan to use DOS support. J ) Changing banks. Once you have selected a bank of 16K to use, the procedure for making the change from BASIC is as follows: 1. Set the Data Direction Register if necessary. In order to use Bits 0 and 1 of Port A to change banks, these bits must be set as outputs in Data Direction Register A. Since this is the default condition on powering-up, this step normally will not be needed. 2. Select a bank. Banks 0-3 can be chosen by entering the following lines: POKE 56578, PEEK(56578) OR 3: REM SET FOR OUTPUT IF NOT ALREADY POKE 56576,(PEEK(56576) AND 252) OR (3-BANK): REM BANK IS BANK #, MUST BE 0-3 3. Set the VIC-II register for character memory. As explained at the entry for location 53272 ($D018), the formula for this is: POKE 53272, (PEEK(53272) AND 240) OR TK: REM TK IS 2 KBYTE OFFSET FROM BEGINNING OF BLOCK 4. Set the VIC-II register for display memory. As explained at the entry for location 53272 ($D018), the formula for this is: POKE 53272, (PEEK(53272) AND 15) OR K*16: REM K IS KBYTE OFFSET FROM BEGINNING OF BLOCK Since steps 2 and 3 operate on the same register, you could combine these steps and just POKE 53272, (16*K+TK). 4. Set the Operating System pointer for display memory at 648 ($288). Even though you have just told the VIC-II chip where to display memory for the screen, the Operating System does not yet know where to write its text characters. Let it know with this statement: n n POKE 648,AD/256: REM AD IS THE ACTUAL ADDRESS OF SCREEN MEMORY After you make this change, you must watch out for the STOP/ I \ RESTORE key combination. The BRK initialization changes the screen display default to location 1024 in Bank 0, but not the Operating System pointer at 648 ($288). As a result, what you are typing will j \ not be displayed on the screen. The computer v^dll lock up until you turn the power off and back on again. The simplest way to avoid this problem is to disable the RESTORE key entirely (see the entries ' 1 191 56576-56577 for 792 ($318) and 808 ($328) for more information). Below is a sample program which switches the screen to Bank 3. It includes a machine language transfer routine to move the ROM character set to RAM, and a short interrupt routine to correct the RESTORE key problem. After the switch is made, a loop is used to POKE characters to the new screen memory area. Next, the character data is slowly erased, to show that the character set is now in RAM. Then, a loop is used to read the locations of the character set, and write to the same locations. This demonstrates that the 6510 reads the Kemal ROM when you PEEK those locations, but POKEs to the RAM which is being displayed. Finally, the machine language move is used again to show how quickly the set is restored. 20 FOR 1=1 TO 33: READ A: POKE 49151+1, A:NEXT: REM S ET UP ML ROUTINE 30 GOSUB 200: REM ML COPY OF ROM CHARACTER SET TO {SPACE} RAM 40 POKE 56576, PEEK( 56576) AND 252: REM{2 SPACES} ST EP 1, ENABLE BANK 3 50 POKE 53272,44: REM STEPS 2-3, POINT {2 SPACES} VI C-II TO SCREEN AND CHARACTER MEMORY 60 REM SCREEN OFFSET IS 2*16, CHARACTER{2 SPACES }0 FFSET IS 1212 70 POKE 648,200: REM STEP 4, POINT OS TO SCREEN AT 51200 (200*256) 80 PRINT CHR$(147): REM CLEAR SCREEN 90 FOR 1=53236 TO 53245: READ A: POKE I, A: NEXT: R EM NEW INTERRUPT ROUTINE 100 POKE 53246, PEEK(792) :POKE 53247, PEEK( 793 ) : REM SAVE OLD NMI VECTOR 110 POKE 792,244: POKE 793,207: REM ROUTE THE INTE RRUPT THROUGH THE NEW ROUTINE 120 FOR 1=0 TO 255: POKE 51400+1, I: POKE 55496+1,1: NEXT 125 REM POKE CHARACTERS TO SCREEN 130 FOR J=l TO 8: FOR I=61439+J TO 1+2048 STEP 8 140 POKE 1,0: NEXT I, J: REM ERASE CHARACTER SET 150 FOR 1=61440 TO I+2048:POKE I,PEEK(I) :NEXT: REM POKE ROM TO RAM 160 GOSUB 200: END: REM RESTORE CHARACTER SET 200 POKE 56334, PEEK( 56334) AND 254: REM DISABLE IN TERRUPTS 210 POKE 1,PEEK(1) AND 251: REM SWITCH CHARACTER R OM INTO 6510 MEMORY 220 SYS 49152: REM COPY ROM CHARACTER SET TO RAM A T 61440 230 POKE 1,PEEK(1) OR 4: REM SWITCH CHARACTER ROM {SPACE} OUT OF 6510 MEMORY 240 POKE 56334, PEEK(56334) OR 1: REM ENABLE INTERR UPTS 192 250 RETORN 300 REM DATA FOR ML PROGRAM TO COPY CHARACTER SET {SPACE} TO RAM 310 DATA169,0, 133,251,133,253,169,208,133,252,169, 240,133,254,162,16 320 DATA160,0, 177, 251, 145, 253, 136, 208, 249,230, 252, 230, 254, 202, 208, 240, 96 330 REM NEXT IS ML PROGRAM TO MAKE THE RESTORE KEY RESET OS POINTER TO SCREEN 340 DATA 72,169,4,141,136,02,104,108,254,207 See also the sample program showing how to configure your 64 like a PET at location 43 ($2B). 56576 $DDOO CI2PRA Data Port Register A Bits 0-1: Select the 16K VIC-II chip memory bank (ll=bank 0, 00= bank 3) Bit 2: RS-232 data output (Sout)/Pin M of User Port Bit 3: Serial bus ATN signal output Bit 4: Serial bus clock pulse output Bit 5: Serial bus data output Bit 6: Serial bus clock pulse input Bit 7: Serial bus data input 56577 $DD01 CI2PRB Data Port Register 6 Bit 0: RS-232 data input (SIN)/ Pin C of User Port Bit 1: RS-232 request to send (RTS)/ Pin D of User Port Bit 2: RS-232 data terminal ready (DTR)/ Pin E of User Port Bit 3: RS-232 ring indicator (RI)/ Pin F of User Port Bit 4: RS-232 carrier detect (DCD)/ Pin H of User Port Bit 5: Pin J of User Port Bit 6: RS-232 clear to send (CTS)/ Pin K of User Port Toggle or pulse data output for Timer A Bit 7: RS-232 data set ready (DSR)/ Pin L of User Port Toggle or pulse data output for Timer B Location Range: 56578-56579 ($DD02$DD03) CIA #2 Data Direction Registers A and B These Data Direction registers control the direction of data flow over Data Ports A and B. For more details on the operation of these registers, see the entry for the CIA #1 Data Direction Registers at 56322 ($DC02). 56578 The default setting for Data Direction Register A is 63 (all bits except 6 and 7 are outputs), and for Data Direction Register B the default setting is 0 (all inputs). Bits 1 and 2 of Port B are changed to output when the RS-232 device is opened. 56578 $DD02 Data Direction Register A 1= output) Select Bit 1 1= output) Select Bit 2 1= output) Select Bit 3 1 = output) Select Bit 4 1= output) Select Bit 5 1= output) Select Bit 6 1= output) Select Bit 7 1= output) C2DDRA of data Port A for input or output (0 = input, of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. C2DDRB 56579 $DD03 Data Direction Register B Bit 0: Select Bit 0 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 1: Select Bit 1 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 2: Select Bit 2 of data Port B for input or output (0=input, 1= output) Bit 3: Select Bit 3 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 4: Select Bit 4 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 5: Select Bit 5 of data Port B for input or output (0=input, 1= output) Bit 6: Select Bit 6 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 7: Select Bit 7 of data Port B for input or output (0=input, 1= output) 194 56585 Location Range: 56580-56583 ($DD04$DD07) Timer A and B Low and High Bytes These four timer registers are used to control Timers A and B. For details on the operation of these timers, see the entry for Location Range 56324-56327 ($DC04-$DC07). The 64 Operating System uses the CIA #2 Timers A and B mostly for timing RS-232 send and receive operations. Serial Bus timing uses CIA #1 Timer B. 56580 $DD04 TI2ALO Timer A (low byte) 56581 $DD05 TI2AHI Timer A (high byte) 56582 $DD06 TI2BLO Timer B (low byte) 56583 $DD07 TI2BHI Timer B (high byte) Location Range: 56584-56587 ($DD08$DDOB) Time of Day Clock In addition to the two general-purpose timers, the 6526 CIA chip has a special-purpose Time of Day Clock, which keeps time in a format that humans can understand a little more easily than microseconds. For more information about this clock, see the entry for Location Range 56328-56331 ($DC08-$DC0B). The 64's Operating System does not make use of these registers. 56584 $DD08 T02TEN Time of Day Clock Tenths of Seconds Bits 0-3: Time of Day tenths of second digit (BCD) Bits 4-7: Unused 56585 $DD09 T02SEC Time of Day Clock Seconds Bits 0-3: Second digit of Time of Day seconds (BCD) Bits 4-6: First digit of Time of Day seconds (BCD) Bit 7: Unused 195 56586 56586 $DDOA T02MIN Time of Day Clock Minutes Bits 0-3: Second digit of Time of Day minutes (BCD) Bits 4-6: First digit of Time of Day minutes (BCD) Bit 7: Unused 56587 $DDOB T02HRS Time of Day Clock Hours Bits 0-3: Second digit of Time of Day hours (BCD) Bit 4: First digit of Time of Day hours (BCD) Bits 5-6: Unused Bit 7: AM/PM flag (1=PM, 0=AM) 56588 $DDOC CI2SDR Serial Data Port The CIA chip has an on-chip serial port, which allows you to send or receive a byte of data one bit at a time, with the most significant bit (Bit 7) being transferred first. For more information about its use, see the entry for location 56332 ($DCOC). The 64's Operating System does not use this facility. 56589 $DDOD CI2ICR Interrupt Control Register Bit 0: Read/ did Timer A count down to 0? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable Timer A interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 1: Read/ did Timer B count down to 0? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable Timer B interrupt (l=enable, 0= disable) Bit 2: Read/ did Time of Day Clock reach the alarm time? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable TOD clock alarm interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 3: Read/ did the serial shift register finish, a byte? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable serial shift register interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 4: Read/ was a signal sent on the FLAG line? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable FLAG line interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 5: Not used Bit 6: Not used Bit 7: Read/ did any CIA #2 source cause an interrupt? (l=yes) Write/set or clear bits of this register (l=bits written with 1 will be set, 0=bits written with 1 will be cleared) This register is used to control the five interrupt sources on the 6526 196 n 56591 CIA chip. For details on its operation, see the entry for 56333 '-J ($DCOD). The main difference between these two chips pertaining to this register is that on CIA #2, the FLAG line is connected to Pin B r— ! of the User Port, and thus is available to the user who wishes to take j 1 advantage of its ability to cause interrupts for handshaking purposes. Location Range: 56590-56591 ($DDOE$DDOF See locations 56334 and 56335 for details 56590 $DDOE CI2CRA Control Register A Bit 0: Start Timer A (l=start, O=stop) Bit 1: Select Timer A output on Port B (1= Timer A output appears on Bit 6 of Port B) Bit 2: Port B output mode (l=toggle Bit 6, 0=pulse Bit 6 for one cycle) Bit 3: Timer A run mode (1= one-shot, 0= continuous) Bit 4: Force latched value to be loaded to Timer A counter (l=force load strobe) Bit 5: Timer A input mode (l=count microprocessor cycles, O=count signals on CNT line at pin 4 of User Port) Bit 6: Serial port (56588, $DDOC) mode (l=output, 0=input) Bit 7: Time of Day Clock frequency (1=50 Hz required on TOD pin, 0=60 Hz) 56591 $DDOF CI2CRB Control Register B Bit 0: Start Timer B (l=start, O=stop) Bit 1: Select Timer B output on Port B (1= Timer B output appears on Bit 7 of Port B) Bit 2: Port B output mode (l=toggle Bit 7, 0=pulse Bit 7 for one n cycle) Bit 3: Timer B run mode (l=one-shot, O=continuous) Bit 4: Force latched value to be loaded to Timer B counter (l=force load strobe) I I Bits 5-6: Timer B input mode 00 = Timer B counts microprocessor cycles 01 = Count signals on CNT line at pin 4 of User Port 10 = Count each time that Timer A counts down to 0 ' 11 = Count Timer A O's when CNT pulses are also present Bit 7: Select Time of Day write (0=vmting to TOD registers sets j*^ alarm, 1 = writing to TOD registers sets clock 197 56592-56831 Location Range: 56592-56831 ($DD10$DDFF) CIA #2 Register Images Since the CIA chip requires only enough addressing lines to handle 16 registers, none of the higher bits are decoded when addressing the 256-byte area that has been assigned to it. The result is that every 16-byte area in this 256-byte block is a mirror of every other. For the sake of clarity in your programs, it is advisable not to use these addresses. Location Range: 56832-57087 ($DEOO$DEFF) Reserved for I/O Expansion This range of locations is not used directly by the 64's internal hardware. It is, however, accessible via pin 7 of the Expansion Port. It can be used to control cartridges which are connected to this port. For example, the CP/M module uses this space to control which microprocessor is in control of the system. The Z-80 microprocessor is turned on and off by writing to 56832 ($DEOO). Another cartridge which uses this space is Simon's BASIC. This 16K cartridge is addressed at memory locations 32768-49151 ($8000$BFFF), which means that it overlaps the regular BASIC ROM at 40960-49151 ($AOOO-$BFFF). But since it contains additions to BASIC, it must use the BASIC ROM as well. This problem is solved by copying the cartridge at 32768-40959 ($8000-$9FFF) to RAM, and turning the cartridge on and off by writing to or reading from location 56832 ($DE00). Location Range: 57088-57343 ($DFOO$DFFF) CIA #2 Register Images This range of locations is not used directly by the 64's internal hardware, but is accessible via pin 10 of the Expansion Port. One possible use for this I/O memory that Commodore has mentioned is an inexpensive parallel disk, drive (which presumably would be much faster than the current serial model). Alternate 53248-57343 ($D000$DFFF): Character Generator ROM The character generator ROM supplies the data which is used to form the shapes of the text and graphics characters that are dis198 53248-57343 played on screen. Each character requires eight bytes of shape data, and these eight-byte sequences are arranged in the order in which the characters appear in the screen code chart (see Appendix G). For example, the first eight bytes of data in the ROM hold the shape information for the commercial at sign (@), the next eight hold the shape of the letter A, etc. In all, there are 4096 bytes, representing shape data for two complete character sets of 256 characters each — IK each for uppercase/graphics, reverse uppercase/reverse graphics, lowercase/uppercase, and reverse lowercase/reverse uppercase. The shape of each character is formed by an 8 by 8 matrix of screen dots. Whether any of the 64 dots is lit up or not is determined by the bit patterns of the character data. Each byte of the Character ROM holds a number from 0 to 255. This number can be represented by eight binary digits of 0 or 1. The leftmost bit of these eight is known as Bit 7, while the rightmost bit is called Bit 0. Each of these binary digits has a bit value that is two times greater than the last. The values of a bit set to 1 in each of the bit places are: Bit 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Value 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 A byte whose value is 255 has every bit set to 1 (128 + 64-1-32 + 16-18+4+2+1=255), while a byte whose value is 0 is made up of all zero bits. Numbers in between are made up of combinations of bits set to 1 and bits set to 0. If you think of every bit that holds a 0 as a dot on the screen which is the color of the screen background, and every bit that holds a 1 as a dot whose color is that of the appropriate nybble in Color RAM, you can begin to get an idea of how the byte values relate to the shape of the character. For example, if you PEEK at the first eight bytes of the character ROM (the technique is explained in the entry for location 1), you will see the numbers 60, 102, 110, 110, 96, 98, 60, 0. Breaking these data bytes down into their bit values gives us a picture that looks like the following: 00111100 0 + 0 + 32 + 16+ 8+ 4 + 0 + 0 = 60 01100110 0 + 64 + 32 + 0 + 0+ 4+ 2+ 0 = 102 01101110 0 + 64+ 32+ 0+ 8+ 4 + 2+ 0 = 110 01101110 0 + 64+ 32+ 0+ 8+ 4+ 2 + 0 = 110 01100000 0 + 64 + 32+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0 = 96 01100010 0 + 64+ 32 + 0 + 0+ 0+ 2+ 0 = 98 00111100 0 + 0+ 32 + 16+ 8+ 4+ 0+ 0 = 60 00000000 0 + 0+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0 = 0 If you look closely, you will recognize the shape of the commercial at sign (@) as it's displayed on your screen. The first byte of data is 60, and you can see that Bits 5, 4, 3, and 2 are set to 1. The chart above shows that the bit values for these bits are 32, 16, 8, and 4. 199 53248-57343 Adding these together, you get 32+16+8+4=60. This should give you an idea of how the byte value corresponds to the patterns of lit dots. For an even more graphic display, type in the following program, which shows the shape of any of the 512 characters in the ROM, along with the number value of each byte of the shape. 10 DIM B%(7),T%{7): FOR 1=0 TO 7: T%(I)=2tl: NEXT 20 POKE 53281,2: PRINT CHR$(147): POKE 53281,1: PO KE 53280,0: POKE 646,11 30 POKE 214,20: PRINT: INPUT " CHARACTER NUMBER (0 -511)";C$ 40 C=VAL(C$): GOSUB 80: FOR 1=0 TO 7 50 POKE 214, 6+1: PRINT: PRINT TAB( 23 ) ;B% ( I ) ; CHR$ ( 20) ;"{3 SPACES}" 60 FOR J=7 TO 0 STEP-1: POKE 1319+( 7-J)+I*40, 32-12 8*((B%(I)ANDT%(J) )=T%(J)) 70 NEXT J, I: POKE 214,20: PRINT: PRINT TAB(27)" {4 SPACES}": GOTO 30 80 POKE 56333,127: POKE 1,51:F0R 1=0 TO 7 90 B%(I)=PEEK(53248+C*8+I) : NEXT: POKE 1,55: POKE {SPACE} 56333, 129: RETURN If you have read about the VIC-II video chip, you know that it can address only 16K of memory at a time, and that all display data such as screen memory, character shape data, and sprite shape data must be stored within that 16K block. Since it would be very inconvenient for the VIC-II chip to be able to access the character data only at the 16K block which includes addresses 53248-57343 ($DOOO-$DFFF), the 64 uses an addressing trick that makes the VIC-II chip see an image of the Character ROM at 4096-8191 ($1000-$1FFF) and at 36864-40959 ($9000-$9FFF). It is not available in the other two blocks. To generate characters in these blocks, you must supply your own userdefined character set, or copy the ROM data to RAM. A machine language routine for doing this is included in a sample program at the entry for 56576 ($DD00). As indicated above, you are by no means limited to using the character data furnished by the ROM. The availability of userdefined characters greatly extends the graphics power of the 64. It allows you to create special text characters, like math or chemistry symbols and foreign language alphabets. You can also develop special graphics characters as a substitute for plotting points in bitmap graphics. You can achieve the same resolution using a custom character as in high-resolution bitmap mode, but with less memory. Once you have defined the character, it is much faster to print it to the screen than it would be to plot out all of the individual points. To employ user-defined characters, you must first pick a spot to put the shape data. This requires choosing a bank of 16K for video 200 53248-57343 chip memory (see the entry under Bits 0-1 of 56576, $DDOO for the considerations involved), and setting the pointer to the 2K area of character memory in 53272 ($D018). It is then up to you to supply the shape data for the characters. You can use part of the ROM character set by reading the ROM and transferring the data to your character shape area (see the entry for location 1 for a method of reading the ROM). Your original characters may be created by darkening squares on an 8 by 8 grid, converting all darkened squares to their bit values, and then adding the bit values for each of the eight bytes. Or, you may use one of the many character graphics editor programs that are available commercially to generate the data interactively by drawing on the screen. One graphics mode, multicolor text mode, almost requires that you define your own character set in order to use it effectively. Multicolor mode is enabled by Bit 4 of location 53270 ($D016). Instead of using each bit to control whether an individual dot will be foreground color (1) or background color (0), that mode breaks down each byte of shape data in four bit-pairs. These bit-pairs control whether a dot will be the color in Background Color Register #0 (00), the color in Background Color Register #1 (01), the color in Background Color Register #2 (10), or the color in the appropriate nybble of Color RAM (11). Since each pair of bits controls one dot, each character is only four dots across. To make up for this, each dot is twice as wide as a normal high-resolution dot. 201 8K Operating System Kernal ROM n 8K Operating System Kernal ROM Locations 57344 to 65535 ($E000 to $FFFF) are used by the 8K Operating System Kemal ROM. This ROM contains the master control program that directs all of the computer's input and output. When you turn the 64's power on, this program takes over and performs the various internal tasks which are necessary to enable you to use the computer. These include such things as clearing RAM, getting the I/O devices and video display chip ready for use, setting various pointers, checking for autostart cartridges, and setting up BASIC if no such cartridges are found. The Kemal ROM contains many useful I/O routines that you might wish to incorporate in your own programs. However, the Kemal ROM is subject to revision (it was revised twice in the first six months alone), and these routines are not guaranteed to stay in the same place. This means that if your programs make direct jumps into the ROM, there is no telling if your program will work with future versions of the Kemal on later Commodore models. To help avoid these incompatability problems. Commodore provides a jump table at the end of the ROM which points to the current location of each of a number of these routines in any given Kemal. J— ) This jump table has been a feature of all Commodore computers L ! from the beginning, and has been expanded in the 64 to include 39 separate routines. The jump vectors for the original 15 routines which have always been included in the table (such as the one to I j the routine which outputs a character) are the same as on previous Commodore computers. By having your program jump to the table address rather than directly to the routine desired, you can guarantee r~\ that your program will work without modification on future versions ' of the 64, as well as on future Commodore models. To the extent that your programs do not require the enhanced r— ! graphics capabilities of the 64, they can also be made to work with ' _ i the PET and VIC-20 computers. So remember: While jumping to undocumented entry points may save time in the short mn, in the long mn it may cause compatibility problems and should be avoided. n 205 57344 As with the section on the BASIC ROM, this section is not meant to be a complete explanation of the Kemal ROM, but rather a guidepost for further exploration. Where the exact instructions the Kemal ROM routines use are important to your programming, it will be necessary for you to obtain a disassembly listing of those routines and look at the code itself. Keep in mind that there is 8K of RAM underlying the Kemal ROM that can be used by tuming off intermpts and switching out the Kemal ROM temporarily. Even without switching out the Kernal ROM, this RAM may be read by the VICtII chip if it is banked to use the top 16K of memory, and may be used for graphics data. The Kemal and BASIC ROMs may be copied to RAM, and the RAM versions modified to change existing features or add new ones. There are some differences between the version of the Kemal found on the first few Commodore 64s and those found on the majority of newer models. Those differences are discussed in the entries for title sections on later Kemal additions (patches) at 58541-58623 ($E4AD-$E4FF) and 65371-65407 ($FF5B-$FF7F). The most obvious change causes the Color RAM at 55296 ($D800) to be initialized to the foreground color when the screen is cleared on newer models, instead of background color white as on the earlier models. Other changes allow the new Kemal software to be used by either U.S. or European 64s. Keep in mind that the Kemal is always subject to change, and that the following discussion, while accurate at the time written (mid-1984), may not pertain to later models. If future changes are like past ones, however, they are likely to be minor ones. Tlie first place to look for these changes would be in the patch sections identified above. 57344 $E000 Continuation of EXP Routine This routine is split, with part on the BASIC ROM and the other part here. Since the two ROMs do not occupy contiguous memory as on most Commodore machines, the BASIC ROM ends with a JMP $E000 instmction. Thus, while the BASIC interpreter on the 64 is for the most part the same as on the VIC, the addresses for routines in this ROM are displaced by three bytes from their location on the VIC. 57411 $E043 POLYl Function Series Evaluation Subroutine 1 This routine is used to evaluate more complex expressions, and calls the following routine to do the intermediate evaluatiion. 206 57495 57433 $E059 POLY2 Function Series Evaluation Subroutine 2 This is the main series evaluation routine, which evaluates expressions by using a table of the various values that must be operated on in sequence to obtain the proper result. 57485 $E08D RMULC Multiplicative Constant for RND A five-byte floating point number which is multiplied by the seed value as part of the process of obtaining the next value for RND. 57490 $E092 RADDC Additive Constant for RND The five-byte floating point number stored here is added to the seed as part of the process of obtaining the value for RND. 57495 $E097 RND Perform RND This routine comes up with a random number in one of three ways, depending on the argument X of RND(X). If the argument is positive, the next RND value is obtained by multiplying the seed value in location 139 ($8B) by one of the constants above, adding the other constant, and scrambling the resulting bytes. This produces the next number in a sequence. So many numbers can be produced in this way before the sequence begins to repeat that it can be considered random. If the argument is negative, the argument itself is scrambled, and made the new seed. This allows creation of a sequence that can be duplicated. If the argument is 0, four bytes of the Floating Point Accumulator are loaded from the low and high byte of Timer A, and the tenths of second and second Time of Day Clock registers, all on CIA #1. This provides a somewhat random value determined by the setting of those timers at the moment that the command is executed, which becomes the new seed value. The RND(l) command should then be used to generate further random numbers. The RND(O) implementation on the 64 has serious problems which make it unsuitable for generating a series of random numbers when used by itself. First of etfi, the Time of Day Clock on CIA #1 (see 56328-56331, $DC08-$DC0B) does not start running until you write to the tenth of second register. The Operating System never starts this clock, and therefore the two registers used as part of the floating point RND(O) value always have a value of 0. Even if the dock was started, however, these registers keep time in Binary Coded Decimal (BCD) format, which means that they do not produce a full 207 57593 range of numbers from 0 to 255. In addition, the Timer A high register output ranges only from 0 to 66, which also limits the range of the final floating point value, so that certain numbers are never chosen. 57593 $E0F9 Call Kernal I/O Routines This section is used when BASIC wants to call the Kernal I/O routines CHROUT, CHRIN, CHKOUT, CHKIN, and GETIN. It handles any errors that result from the call, and creates a 512-byte buffer space at the top of BASIC and executes a CLR if the RS-232 device is opened. 57642 $E12A SYS Perform SYS Before executing the machine language subroutine (JSR) at the address indicated, the .A, .X, .Y, and .P registers are loaded from the storage area at 780-783 ($30C-$30F). After the return from subroutine (RTS), the new values of those registers are stored back at 780783 ($30C-$30F). 57686 $E156 SAVE Perform SAVE This routine sets the range of addresses to be saved from the start of BASIC program text and end of BASIC program text pointers at 43 ($2B) and 45 ($2D), and calls the Kernal SAVE routine. This means that any area of memory can be saved by altering these two pointers to point to the starting and ending address of the desired area, and then changing them back. 57701 $E165 VERIFY Perform VERIFY This routine sets the load/verify flag at 10 ($A), and falls through to the LOAD routine. 57704 $E168 LOAD Perform LOAD This routine sets the load address to the start of BASIC (from pointer at 43, $2B), and calls the Kernal LOAD routine. If the load is successful, it relinks the BASIC program so that the links agree with the address to which it is loaded, and it resets the end of BASIC pointer to reflect the new end of program text. If the LOAD was done while a program was running, the pointers are reset so that the program starts executing all over again from the beginning. A CLR is not performed, so that the variables built so far are retained, and their 208 57862 values are still accessible. The pointer to the variable area is not changed, but if the new program is longer than the one that loaded it, the variable table will be partially overwritten. This will cause errors when the overwritten variables are referenced. Likewise, strings whose text was referenced at its location within the original program listing will be incorrect. Since a LOAD from a program causes the program execution to continue at the first line, when loading a machine language routine or data file with a nonrelocating load (for example, L0AD"FILE",8,1) from a program, you should read a flag and GOTO the line after the LOAD if you don't want the program to keep rerunning indefinitely: 10 IF FLAG=1 THEN GOTO 30 20 FLAG=1: LOAD "FILE",8,1 30 REM PROGRAM CONTINUES HERE 57790 $E1BE OPEN Perform OPEN The BASIC OPEN statement calls the Kemal OPEN routine. 57799 $E1C7 CLOSE Perform CLOSE The BASIC CLOSE statement calls the Kemal CLOSE routine. 57812 $E1D4 Set Parameters for LOAD, VERIFY, and SAVE This routine is used in common by LOAD, SAVE, and VERIFY for setting the filename, the logical file, device number, and secondary address, all of which must be done prior to these operations. 57856 $E200 Skip Comma and Get Integer in .X This subroutine is used to skip the comma between parameters and get the following integer value in the .X register. 57862 $E206 Fetch Current Character and Check for End of Line This subroutine gets the current character, and if it is a 0 (end of line), it pulls its own return address off the stack and returns. This terminates both its own execution and that of the subroutine which called it. 57870 57870 $E20E Check for Comma This subroutine checks for a comma, moves the text pointer past it if found, and returns an error if it is not found. 57881 $E219 Set Parameters for OPEN and CLOSE This routine is used in common by OPEN and CLOSE for setting the filename, the logical file, device number, and secondary address, all of which must be done prior to these operations. 57956 $E264 COS Perform COS COS is executed by adding PI/2 to the contents of FACl and dropping through to SIN. 57963 $E26B SIN Perform SIN This routine evaluates the SIN of the number in FACl (which represents the angle in radians), and leaves the result there. 58036 $E2B4 TAN Perform TAN This routine evaluates the tangent of the number in FACl (which represents the angle in radians) by dividing its sine by its cosine. Location Range: 58080-58125 ($E2E0$E30D) Table of Constants for Evaluation of SIN, COS, and TAN 58080 $E2E0 PI2 The Five-Byte Floating Point Representation of the Constant PI/2 58085 $E2E5 TWOPI The Five-Byte Floating Point Representation of the Constant 2*PI 58090 $E2EiV FR4 The Five-Byte Floating Point Representation of the Constant 1/4 58095 $E2EF SINCON Table of Constants for Evaluation of SIN, COS, and TAN This table starts with a counter byte of 5, indicating that there are sbc entries in the table. This is followed by the sbc floating point constants of five bytes each. 210 58274 58126 $E30E ATN Perform ATN The arc tangent of the number in FACl (which represents the angle in radians) is evaluated using the 12-term series of operations from the constant table which follows. The answer is left in FACl. 58174 $E33E ATNCON Table of Constants for ATN Evaluation The table begins with a count byte of 11, which is followed by 12 constants in five-byte floating point representation. 58235 $E37B Warm Start BASIC This is the entry point into BASIC from the BRK routine at 65126 ($FE66), which is executed when the STOP and RESTORE keys are both pressed. It first executes the Kernal CLRCHN routine which closes all files. It then sets the default devices, resets the stack and BASIC program pointers, and jumps through the vector at 768 ($300) to the next routine to print the READY prompt and enter the main BASIC loop. 58251 $E38B Error Message Handler This routine to print error messages is pointed to by the vector at 768 ($300). Using the .X register as an index, it either prints an error message from the table at 41363 ($A193) or the READY prompt, and continues through the vector at 770 ($302) to the main BASIC loop. 58260 $E394 Cold Start BASIC This initialization routine is executed at the time of power-up. The RAM vectors to important BASIC routines are set up starting at 768 ($300), the interpreter is initialized, the start-up messages are printed, and the main loop entered through the end of the warm start routine. 58274 $E3A2 INITAT Text of the CHRGET Routine Which Runs at 115 ($73) The text of the CHRGET routine is stored here, and moved to  by the BASIC initialization routine. When creating a wedge in CHRGET, it is possible to execute all or part of this code in place of the RAM version. 211 58298 58298 $E3BA Initial RND Seed Value At power-up time, this five-byte floating point constant is transferred to 139 ($8B), where it functions as the starting RND seed number. Thus, if RND is not initialized with a negative or zero argument, it will always return the same sequence of numbers. 58303 $E3BF INIT Initialize BASIC This routine is called by the cold start routine to initialize all of the BASIC zero-page locations which have a fixed value. This includes copying the CHRGET routine from the ROM location above, to 115 ($73). 58402 $E422 Print BASIC Start-Up Messages This routine prints the start-up message "***♦ COMMODORE 64 BASIC V2 •***", calculates the amount of free memory, and prints the BYTES FREE message. 58439 $E447 Table of Vectors to Important BASIC Routines This table contains the vectors which point to the addresses of some important BASIC routines. The contents of this table are moved to the RAM table at 768 ($300). 58451 $E453 Copy BASIC Vectors to RAM The cold start routine calls this subroutine to copy the table of vectors to important BASIC routines to RAM, starting at location 768 ($300). 58464 $E460 WORDS Power-Up Messages The ASCII text of the start-up messages "**** COMMODORE 64 BASIC V2 ****" and "BYTES FREE" is stored here. Location Range: 58541-65535 ($E4AD$FFFF) Kemal I/O Routines After the conclusion of BASIC comes the part of this ROM which can be considered the Kemal proper. This part contains all of the vectored routines found in the jump table starting at 65409 ($FF81). 212 58586 Location Range: 58541-58623 ($E4AD$E4FF) Patches Added to Later Kemal Versions This area contains code that was not found in the original version of the Kemal. These additions were made to fix some bugs and to increase Kemal compatibility between U.S. and European 64s. 58541 $E4AD Patch for BASIC Call of CHKOUT This patch was made to preserve the .A register if there was no error retumed from BASIC'S call of the Kemal CHKOUT routine. Apparently, the first version could cause a malfunction of the CMD and PRINT* commands. 58551 $E4B7 28 Unused Bytes (all have the value of 170, $AA) 58579 $E4DA Patch to RS232 Routine 58586 $E4DA Clear Color RAM to the Color of Text Foreground This routine is a patch added to the more recent versions of the Kemal. It is called by the routine which clears a screen line (59903, $E9FF), and it places the value of the current foreground color in 646 ($286) into the current byte of Color RAM pointed to by USER (243, $F3). In the original version of the Kemal, the routine that cleared a screen line set the corresponding Color RAM to a value of 1, which gives text characters a white foreground color. This was changed in I— , version zero because the white color was found to sometimes cause / 1 light flashes during screen scrolling. It was that white foreground color, however, that enabled the user to POKE the screen code for a character into screen RAM, and make that character appear on the } j screen in a color that contrasted the blue background. This change to the Operating System caused colors POKEd to screen RAM to be the same color as the background, and thus made them invisible. By r~J initializing Color RAM to the current foreground color, version 3 of ' ' the Kemal solved this problem. Owners of old 64s can find the solution to the "invisible POKE" ^ problem in the discussion that begins on the bottom of page 81. 213 58592 U 58592 $E4E0 Pause after Finding a File on Cassette This routine is a patch to the routine which finds a file on cassette. After the file is found, the message FILETITLE FOUND appears on the screen. On the original versions of the Kemal, the user would then have to hit the Commodore key to continue the load. On the newer versions, this patch causes a slight pause after a tape file is found, during which time a keypress is looked for. If a key is | j pressed, the loading process continues immediately. If it is not, the load continues by itself after the end of the pause. 58604 $E4EC Baud Rate Table for European (PAL) Standard Monitors This table of prescaler values was added to later Kernal versions to allow the same Kemal software to be used with either U.S. or European 64s. It contains the values which are required to obtain interrupts at the proper frequency for the standard RS-232 baud rates, and corresponds exactly in format to the table of values for the U.S. (NTSC) monitor format at 65218 ($FEC2). Separate tables are required because the prescaler values are derived from dividing the system clock rate by the baud rate, and PAL machines operate with a slightly slower clock frequency. 58624 $E500 lOBASE Store Base Address of Memory-Mapped I/O Devices in .X and .Y Registers This is one of the documented Kemal routines for which there is a vector in the jump table at 65523 ($FFF3). When called, this routine sets the .X register to the low byte of the base address of the memory-mapped I/O devices, and puts the high byte in the .Y register. This allows a user to set up a zero-page pointer to the device, and to load and store indirectly through that pointer. A program which uses this method, rather than directly j j accessing such devices, could be made to function without change on i i future Commodore models, even though the I/O chips may be addressed at different locations. This of course assumes that the CIA or a similar chip will be used. This routine is of limited value for creat- [_J ing software that is compatible with both the VIC-20 and the 64 because of the differences in the VIA I/O chip that VIC uses. The current version of this routine loads the .X register with a 0, i j and the .Y register with 220 ($DC), thus pointing to CIA #1, which ' — ' is at 56320 ($DCOO). I / 58692 58629 $E505 SCREEN Store Number of Screen Rows and Columns in .Y and .X This is a documented Kemal routine which is vectored in the jump table at 65517 ($FFED), and is provided to allow for program compatibility between computers. When called, this subroutine returns the number of screen columns in the .X register, and the number of screen rows in .Y. Thus, a program can detect the screen format of the machine on which it is running, and make sure that text output is formatted accordingly. The present version of this routine loads the .X register with 40 ($28) and the .Y register with 25 ($19). 58634 $E50A PLOT Read/Set Location of the Cursor The jump table entry for this dociunented Kemal is at 65520 ($FFFO). The routine allows the user to read or set the position of the cursor. If the carry flag is set with a SEC instruction before calling this subroutine, cursor column (X position) will be returned in the .X register, and the cursor row (Y position) will be returned in the .Y register. If the carry flag is cleared with a CLC instruction before entering this routine, and the .Y and .X registers are loaded with the desired row and column positions respectively, this routine will set the cursor position accordingly. The current read routine loads .X and .Y from locations 214 ($D6) and 211 ($D3) respectively. The cursor set routine stores .X and .Y in these locations, and calls the routine that sets the screen pointers at 58732 ($E56C). The user can access this routine from BASIC by loading the .X, .Y, and .P register values desired to the save area starting at 780 ($30C). 58648 $E518 Initialize Screen and Keyboard This is the original CINT Kernal routine, to which additions were made in later versions of the Kemal. After calling the routine at 58784 ($E5A0) to set up default I/O values, this routine initializes the cuirsor blink flags, the keyboard decode vector, the key repeat delay and frequency counters, the current color code, and maximum keyboard buffer size. It then falls through to the next routine. 58692 $E544 Initialize the Screen Line Link Table and Clear the Screen This routine initializes the screen line link table at 217 ($D9), clears 215 58726 the screen, and clears the Color RAM to the background color. It falls through to the next routine. 58726 $E566 Home the Cursor This routine sets PNTR (211, $D3) and TBLX (214, $D6) to 0, and falls through to the next routine. 58732 $E56C Set Pointer to Current Screen Line This routine sets the pointer PNT (209, $D1) to the address of the first byte of the current logical line. In figuring this address, it takes into account the status of the screen line link table, which can indicate that two physical lines should be joined as one logical line. 58784 $E5A0 Set Default I/O Devices and Set Default Values for VIC-II Chip Registers This routine sets the keyboard and screen as the current input and output devices. It then writes the default values found in the table at 60601 ($ECB9) to the VIC-II chip. 58804 $E5B4 LP2 Get a Character from the Keyboard Buffer This routine transfers the first character from the keyboard buffer to the .A register, bumps the rest of the characters one place up in line, and decrements the pointer, showing how many characters are waiting in the buffer. 58826 $E5CA Wait for a Carriage Return from the Keyboard This subroutine is called by the portion of the CHRIN routine that handles keyboard input. It turns the cursor on, gets characters, and echoes them to the screen until a carriage return has been entered. It also looks for the shifted RUN/STOP key, and forces the output of the commands LOAD and RUN if it finds it. 58930 $E632 Input a Character from Screen or Keyboard This routine is the portion of the Kemal CHRIN routine that handles input from the keyboard and screen devices. CHRIN gets one byte at a time from the current screen position, or inputs a whole line from the keyboard and returns it one byte at a time. 216 59537 59012 $E684 Test for Quote Marks This subroutine checks if the current character is a quotation mark, and if it is, toggles the quote switch at 212 ($D4). 59025 $E691 Add a Character to the Screen This is part of the routine that outputs a character to the screen. It puts printable characters into screen memory. 59048 $E6A8 Return from Outputting a Character to the Screen This is the common exit point for the screen portion of the CHROUT routine. 59062 $E6B6 Advance the Cursor This routine advances the cursor, and provides for such things as scrolling at the end of the screen, and inserting a blank line in order to add another physical line to the current logical line. 59137 $E701 Move Cursor Back over a 40-Colunui Line Boundary 59158 $E716 Output to the Screen This is the main entry point for the part of CHROUT that handles output to the screen device. It takes the ASCII character number, and tests if the character is printable. If it is, it prints it (taking into consideration the reverse flag, if any inserts are left, etc.). If it is a nonprinting character, the routine performs the appropriate cursor movement, color change, screen clearing, or whatever else might be indicated. 59516 $E87C Move Cursor to Next Line This subroutine moves the cursor down to the next line if possible, or scrolls the screen if the cursor is on the last line. 59537 $E891 Output a Carriage Return A carriage return is performed by clearing insert mode, reverse video, and quote mode, and moving the cursor to the next line.

---
