# Category: SCREEN_RAM

nome: VICSCN
descrizione: Video Screen Memory Area This is the default location of the video screen memory area, which contains the video matrix and the sprite data pointers. Keep in mind, however, that the video screen memory area can be relocated to start on any even IK boundary. Its location at any given moment is determined by the VIC-II chip memory control register at 53272 ($D018), and the VIC-II memory bank select bits on CIA #2 Data Port A (56576, $DDOO). 1024-2023 $400-$7E7 Video Matrix: 25 Lines by 40 Columns The video matrix is where text screen characters are stored in RAM. Normally, the VIC-II chip will treat each byte of memory here as a screen display code and will display the text character that corresponds to that byte of code. The first byte of memory here will be displayed in the top-left corner of the screen, and subsequent bytes will be displayed in the columns to the right and the rows below that character. It is possible to make text or graphics characters appear on the screen by POKEing their screen codes directly into this area of RAM. For example, the letter A has a screen code value of 1 . Therefore, POKE 1024,1 should make the letter A appear in the top-left comer of the screen. However, you should be aware that the most current version of the Operating System initializes the color RAM which is used for the foreground color of text characters to the same value as the background color every time that the screen is cleared. The result is that although the POKE will put a blue A on the screen, you won't be able to see it because it is the same color blue as the background. This can be remedied by POKEing a different value into color RAM (which starts at 55296, $D800). 81
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 1024-2047
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $400-$7FF
man: Page 95

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: sprite Shape Data Pointers The last eight bytes of the video matrix (whether it is here at the default location, or has been relocated elsewhere) are used as pointers to the data blocks used to define the sprite shapes. Each sprite is 3 bytes wide (24 bits) by 21 lines high. It therefore requires 63 bytes for its shape definition, but it actually uses 64 bytes in order to arrive at an even 256 shape blocks in the 16K area of RAM which the VIC-II chip addresses. Each pointer holds the current data block being used to define the shape of one sprite. The block number used to define the shape of Sprite 0 is held in location 2040 ($7F8), the Sprite 1 shape block is designated by location 2041 ($7F9), etc. The value in the pointer times 64 equals the starting location of the sprite shape data table. For example, a value of 11 in location 2040 indicates that the shape data for Sprite 0 starts at address 704 (11*64), and continues for 63 more bytes to 767. For additional information on sprite graphics, see the entries for individual VIC-II chip sprite graphics locations, and the summary at the beginning of the VIC-II chip section, at 53248 ($D000). 2048-40959 $800-$9FFF BASIC Program Text This is the area where the actual BASIC program text is stored. The text of a BASIC program consists of linked lines of program tokens. Each line contains the following: 1. A two-byte pointer to the address of the next program line (in standard low-byte, high-byte order). After the last program line, a link pointer consisting of two zeros marks the end of ttie program. 82
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 2040-2047
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $7F8-$7FF
man: Page 96

---
