# Category: VIC

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Sprite 1 Horizontal Position 53251 $D003 sprite 1 Vertical Position 53252 $D004 sprite 2 Horizontal Position 53253 $D005 sprite 2 Vertical Position 53254 $D006 Sprite 3 Horizontal Position 53255 $D007 Sprite 3 Vertical Position 53256 $D008 Sprite 4 Horizontal Position 53257 $D009 Sprite 4 Vertical Position 53258 $DOOJl Sprite 5 Horizontal Position 53259 $DOOB Sprite 5 Vertical Position 53260 $DOOC Sprite 6 Horizontal Position 53261 $DOOD Sprite 6 Vertical Position 53262 $DOOE Sprite 7 Horizontal Position 53263 $DOOF Sprite 7 Vertical Position 53264 $D010 Most Significant Bits of Sprites 0-7 Horizontal Positions Bit 0: Most significant bit of Sprite 0 horizontal position Bit 1: Most significant bit of Sprite 1 horizontal position 128 SPIX SPIY SP2X SP2Y SP3X SP3Y SP4X SP4Y SP5X SP5Y SP6X SP6Y SP7X SP7Y MSIGX
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 53250
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D002
man: 53265 Bit 2: Most significant bit of Sprite 2 horizontal position Bit 3: Most significant bit of Sprite 3 horizontal position Bit 4: Most significant bit of Sprite 4 horizontal position Bit 5: Most significant bit of Sprite 5 horizontal position Bit 6: Most significant bit of Sprite 6 horizontal position Bit 7: Most significant bit of Sprite 7 horizontal position Setting one of these bits to 1 adds 256 to the horizontal position of the corresponding sprite. Resetting one of these bits to 0 restricts the horizontal position of the corresponding sprite to a value of 255 or less. 53265 $D011 SCROLY Vertical Fine Scrolling and Control Register Bits 0-2: Fine scroll display vertically by X scan lines (0-7) Bit 3: Select a 24-row or 25-row text display (1=25 rows, 0=24 rows) Bit 4: Blank the entire screen to the same color as the border (0=blank) Bit 5: Enable bitmap graphics mode (l=enable) Bit 6: Enable extended color text mode (1= enable) Bit 7: High bit (Bit 8) of raster compare register at 53266 ($D012) This is one of the two important multifunction control registers on the VIC-II chip. Its default value is 155, which sets the high bit of the raster compare to 1, selects a 25-row text display, disables the blanking feature, and uses a vertical scrolling offset of three scan lines. Bits 0-2. These bits control vertical fine scrolling of the screen display. This feature allows you to move the entire text display smoothly up and down, enabling the display area to act as a window, scrolling over a larger text or character graphics display. Since each row of text is eight scan lines high, if you simply move each line of text up one row, the characters travel an appreciable distance each time they move, which gives the motion a jerky quality. This is called coarse scrolling, and you can see an example of it when LISTing a program that is too long to fit on the screen all at one time. By placing a number from 1 to 7 into these three bits, you can move the whole screen display down by from 1 to 7 dot spaces. Stepping through values 1 to 7 allows you to smoothly make the transition from having a character appear in one row on the screen to having it appear in the next row. To demonstrate this, type in the following sample program, LIST it, and RUN. 10 FOR 1= 1 TO 50 I FOR J=0 TO 7 20 POKE 53265, ( PEEK ( 53265 )AND248) OR J:NEXTJ,I 30 FOR 1= 1 TO 50: FOR J=7 TO 0 STEP-1 40 POKE 53265, (PEEK( 53265 )AND248) OR J:NEXTJ,I 53265 As you can see, after the display has moved seven dot positions up or down, it starts over at its original position. In order to continue the scroll, you must do a coarse scroll every time the value of the scroll bits goes from 7 to 0, or from 0 to 7. This is accomplished by moving the display data for each line by 40 bytes in either direction, overwriting the data for the last line, and introducing a line of data at the opposite end of screen memory to replace it. Obviously, only a machine language program can move all of these lines quickly enough to maintain the effect of smooth motion. The following BASIC program, however, will give you an idea of what vertical fine scrolling is like. 10 POKE 53281,0:PRINTCHR$(5);CHR$(147) 20 F0RI=1 TO 22: 30 PRINTTAB(15)CHR$(145)"{12 SPACES }": POKE 53265, P EEK( 53265 )AND248 40 WAIT53265,128:PRINTTAB{15)"I'M FALLING" 50 FOR J=l TO 7 60 POKE53265, ( PEEK( 53265 )AND248 ) +J 70 FORK=1TO50 80 NEXT K,J,I:RUN Bit 3. This bit register allows you to select either the normal 25line text display (by setting the bit to 1), or a shortened 24-row display (by resetting that bit to 0). This shortened display is created by extending the border to overlap the top or bottom row. The characters in these rows are still there; they are just covered up. The shortened display is designed to aid vertical fine scrolling. It covers up the line into which new screen data is introduced, so that the viewer does not see the new data being moved into place. However, unlike the register at 53270 ($D016) which shortens the screen by one character space on either side to aid horizontal scrolling in either direction, this register can blank only one vertical line at a time. In order to compensate, it blanks the top line when the three scroll bits in this register are set to 0, and shifts the blanking one scan line at a time as the value of these bits increases. Thus the bottom line is totally blanked when these bits are set to 7. Bit 4. Bit 4 of this register controls the screen blanking feature. When this bit is set to 0, no data can be displayed on the screen. Instead, the whole screen will be filled with the color of the frame (which is controlled by the Border Color Register at 53280, $D020). Screen blanking is useful because of the way in which the VIC11 chip interacts with the 6510 microprocessor. Since the VIC-II and the 6510 both have to address the same memory, they must share the system data bus. Sharing the data bus means that they must take turns whenever they want to address memory. The VIC-II chip was designed so that it fetches most of the data it needs during the part of the cycle in which the 6510 is not using 130 53265 the data bus. But certain operations, such as reading the 40 screen codes needed for each line of text from video memory, or fetching sprite data, require that the VIC-II chip get data at a faster rate than is possible just by using the off half of the 6510 cycle. Thus, the VIC-II chip must delay the 6510 for a short amount of time while it is using the data bus to gather display information for text or bitmap graphics, and must delay it a little more if sprites are also enabled. When you set the screen blanking bit to 0, these delays are eliminated, and the 6510 processor is allowed to run at its full speed. This speeds up any processing task a little. To demonstrate this, run the following short program. As you will see, leaving the screen on makes the processor run about 7 percent slower than when you turn it off. If you perform the same timing test on the VIC-20, you will find that it runs at the same speed with its screen on as the 64 does with its screen off. And the same test on a PET will run substantially slower. 10 PRINT CHR$(147);TAB(13);"TIMING TEST" : PRINT :TI$ ="000000": GOTO 30 20 FOR 1=1 TO 10000 :NEXT I:RETURN 30 GOSUB 20:DISPLAY=TI 40 POKE 53265, 11 :TI$="000000" 50 GOSUB 20:NOSCREEN=TI:POKE 53265,27 60 PRINT "THE LOOP TOOK" ; DISPLAY; " JIFFIES" 70 PRINT "WITH NO SCREEN BLANKING" : PRINT 80 PRINT "THE LOOP TOOK" ;NOSCREEN; " JIFFIES" 90 PRINT "WITH SCREEN BLANKING" : PRINT 100 PRINT "SCREEN BLANKING MADE THE PROCESSOR" 110 PRINT "GO" ;DISPLAY/NOSCREEN*100-100; "PERCENT F ASTER" The above explanation accounts for the screen being turned off during tape read and write operations. The timing of these operations is rather critical, and would be affected by even the relatively small delay caused by the video chip. It also explains why the 64 has difficulty loading programs from an unmodified 1540 Disk Drive, since the 1540 was set up to transfer data from the VIC-20, which does not have to contend with these slight delays. If you turn off the 64 display with a POKE 53265,PEEK(53265) AND 239, you will be able to load programs correctly from an old 1540 drive. The new 1541 drive transfers data at a slightly slower rate in the default setting, and can be set from software to transfer it at the higher rate for the VIC-20. Bit 5. Setting Bit 5 of this register to 1 enables the bitmap graphics mode. In this mode, the screen area is broken down into 64,000 separate dots of light, 320 dots across by 200 dots high. Each dot corresponds to one bit of display memory. If the bit is set to 1, the dot will be displayed in the foreground color. If the bit is reset to 131 53265 u u 1 I 0, it will be displayed in the background color. This allows the display of high-resolution graphics images for games, charts, and graphs, etc. Bitmapping is a common technique for implementing highresolution graphics on a microcomputer. There are some features of ! [ the Commodore system which are unusual, however. Most systems display screen memory sequentially; that is, the first byte controls the display of the first eight dots in the upper-left * j comer of the screen, the second byte controls the eight dots to the right of that, etc. In the Commodore system, display memory is laid out more along the lines of how character graphics dot-data is arranged. The first byte controls the row of eight dots in the top-left corner of the screen, but the next byte controls the eight dots below that, and so on until the ninth byte. The ninth byte controls the eight dots directly to the right of those controlled by the first byte of display memory. It is exactly the same as if the screen were filled with 1000 programmable characters, with display memory taking the place of the character dot-data. The 64's bitmap graphics mode also resembles character graphics in that the foreground color of the dots is set by a color map (although it does not use the Color RAM for this purpose). Four bits of each byte of this color memory control the foreground color of one of these eight-byte groups of display memory (which form an 8 by 8 grid of 64 dots). Unlike character graphics, however, the other four bits control the background color that will be seen in the eight-byte display group where a bit has a value of 0. Setting up a bitmap graphics screen is somewhat more complicated than just setting this register bit to 1. You must first choose a location for the display memory area, and for the color memory area. The display memory area will be 8192 bytes long (8000 of which are actually used for the display) and can occupy only the first or the second half of the 16K space which the VIC-II chip can address. Each byte of bitmap graphics color memory uses four bits for 1 I the background color as well as four bits for the foreground color. ^ Therefore, the Color RAM nybbles at 55296 ($D800), which are wired for four bits only, cannot be used. Another RAM location must \ i therefore be found for color memory. f | This color memory area will take up IK (1000 bytes of which are actually used to control the foreground and background colors of the dots), and must be in the opposite half of VIC-II memory as the I I display data. Since bitmap grapWcs require so much memory for the display, you may want to select a different 16K bank for VIC-II memory (see the discussion of things to consider in selecting a VIC- i II memory bank at location 56576, $DD00). ^ To keep things simple, however, let's assume that you have 132 LJ 53265 selected to use the default bank of VIC-11 memory, which is the first 16K. You would have to select locations 8192-16383 ($2000-$3FFF) for screen memory, because the VIC-II chip sees an image of the character ROM in the first half of the 16K block (at locations 40968191, $1000-$1FFF). Color memory could be placed at the default location of text display memory, at 1024-2047 ($400-$7FF). Placement of bitmap display and color memory is controlled by the VIC Memory Control Register at 53272 ($D018). When in bitmap mode, the lower four bits of this register, which normally control the base address of character dot-data, now control the location of the 8K bitmap. Only Bit 3 is significant. If it is set to 1, the graphics display memory will be in the second 8K of VIC-II memory (in this case, starting at 8192, $2000). If that bit contains a 0, the first 8K will be used for the bitmap. The upper four bits of this register, which normally control the location of the Video Display Matrix, are used in bitmap mode to establish the location of the color map within the VIC-II address space. These four bits can hold a number from 0 to 15, which indicates on which IK boundary the color map begins. For example, if color memory began at 1024 (IK), the value of these four bits would be 0001. Once the bitmap mode has been selected, and the screen and color memory areas set up, you must establish a method for turning each individual dot on and off. The conventional method for identifying each dot is to assign it a horizontal (X) position coordinate and a vertical (Y) coordinate. Horizontal position values will range from 0 to 319, where dot 0 is at the extreme left-hand side of the screen, and dot 319 at the extreme right. Vertical positions will range from 0 to 199, where dot 0 is on the top line, and dot 199 on the bottom line. Because of the unusual layout of bitmap screen data on the 64, it is fairly easy to transfer text characters to a bitmap screen, but it is somewhat awkward finding the bit which affects the screen dot having a given X-Y coordinate. First, you must find the byte BY in which the bit resides, and then you must POKE a value into that byte which turns the desired bit on or off. Given that the horizontal position of the dot is stored in the variable X, its vertical position is in the variable Y, and the base address of the bitmap area is in the variable BASE, you can find the desired byte vnth the formula: BY=BASE-I-40*(Y AND 248) +(Y AND 7)+(X AND 504) To turn on the desired dot, POKE BY, PEEK(BY) OR (211(N0TX AND 7)) To him the dot off, POKE BY, PEEK(BY) AND (255-2 t(NOTX AND 7)) The exponentiation function takes a lot of time. To speed things up, 133 53265 an array can be created, each of whose elements corresponds to a power of two. FOR 1=0 TO 7: BIT(I)=2 f LNEXT After this is done, the expression 2 t (I) can be replaced by BI(I). The following sample program illustrates the bit-graphics concepts explained above, and serves as a summary of that information. 10 FOR 1=0 TO 7:BI(I)=2tl:NEXT: REM SET UP ARRAY O F POWERS OF 2 (BIT VALUES) 20 BASE=2*4096:POKE53272,PEEK(53272)OR8:REM PUT BI T MAP AT 8192 30 POKE53265,PEEK(53265)OR32:REM ENTER BIT MAP MOD E 40 A$="":FOR 1=1 TO 37 : A$=A$+ " C" :NEXT: PRINT CHR$(1 9); 50 FOR 1=1 TO 27:PRINTA$; iNEXTtPOKE 2023 , PEEK( 2022 ) : REM SET COLOR MAP 60 A$="":FOR 1=1 TO 128:A$=A$+"@" :NEXT:FOR 1=32 TO 63 STEP 2 70 POKE 648, I: PRINT CHR$(19) ;A$;A$ ;A$;A$: NEXT: POKE 648, 4: REM CLEAR HI-RES SCREEN 80 FORY=0TO199STEP.5:REM FROM THE TOP OF THE SCREE N TO THE BOTTOM 90 X=INT(160+40*SIN(Y/10) ) : REM SINE WAVE SHAPE 100 BY=BASE+40*(Y AND 248)+(Y AND 7)+(X AND 504): {SPACE} REM FIND HI-RES BYTE 110 POKEBY,PEEK(BY)OR(BI(NOT X AND 7)):NEXT Y: REM POKE IN BIT VALUE 120 GOTO 120: REM LET IT STAY ON SCREEN As you can see, using BASIC to draw in bit-graphics mode is somewhat slow and tedious. Machine language is much more suitable for bit-graphics plotting. For a program that lets you replace some BASIC commands with hi-res drawing commands, see the article "Hi-Res Graphics Made Simple," by Paul F. Schatz, in COMPUTEI's First Book of Commodore 64 Sound and Graphics. There is a slightly lower resolution bitmap graphics mode available which offers up to four colors per 8 by 8 dot matrix. To enable this mode, you must set the multicolor bit (Bit 4 of 53270, $D016) while in bitmap graphics mode. For more information on this mode, see the entry for the multicolor enable bit. Bit 6. This bit of this register enables extended background color mode. This mode lets you select the background color of each text character, as well as its foreground color. It is able to increase the number of background colors displayed, by reducing the number of characters that can be shown on the screen. Normally, 256 character shapes can be displayed on the screen. 134 53265 You can see them either by using the PRINT statement or by POKEing a display code from 0 to 255 into screen memory. If the POKEing method is used, you must also POKE a color code from 0 to 15 into color memory (for example, if you POKE 1024,1, and POKE 55296,1, a white A appears in the top-left corner of the screen). The background color of the screen is determined by Background Color Register 0, and you can change this color by POKEing a new value to that register, which is located at 53281 ($D021). For example, POKE 53281,0 creates a black background. When extended background color mode is activated, however, only the first 64 shapes found in the table of screen display codes can be displayed on the screen. This group includes the letters of the alphabet, numerals, and punctuation marks. If you try to print on the screen a character having a higher display code, the shape displayed will be from the first group of 64, but that character's background color will no longer be determined by the register at 53281 ($D021). Instead, it will be determined by one of the other background color registers. When in extended background color mode, characters having display codes 64-127 will take their background color from register 1, at location 53282 ($D022). These characters include various SHIFTed graphics characters. Those with codes 128-191 will have their background colors determined by register 2, at 53283 ($D023). These include the reversed numbers, letters, and punctuation marks. Finally, characters with codes 192-255 will use register 3, at 53284 ($D024). These are the reversed graphics characters. Let's try an experiment to see just how this works. First, we will put the codes for four different letters in screen memory: FOR 1=0 TO 3: POKE 1230+(I*8),I*64-I-1: POKE 55502-l-(I*8),l: NEXT Four white letters should appear on the screen, an A, a shifted A, a reversed A, and a reversed, shifted A, all on a blue background. Next, we will put colors in the other background color registers: POKE 53282,0: POKE 53283,2: POKE 53284,5 This sets these registers to black, red, and green, respectively. Finally, we will activate extended color mode by setting Bit 6 of the VICII register at location 53265 to a 1. The BASIC statement that turns this mode on is: POKE 53265, PEEK(53265) OR 64 Notice that two things happened. First, all of the letters took on the same shape, that of the letter A. Second, each took on the background color of a different color register. To get things back to normal, turn off extended color mode with this statement: 53265 POKE 53265, PEEK(53265) AND 191 Extended color mode can be a very useful enhancement for your text displays. It allows the creation of windows. These windows, because of their different background colors, make different bodies of text stand out as visually distinct from one another. For example, a text adventure program could have one window to display the player's current location, one to show an inventory of possessions, and one to accept commands for the next move. In this mode the background color of these windows can be changed instantly, just by POKEing a new value to the color register. This technique lends itself to some dramatic effects. A window can be flashed to draw attention to a particular message at certain times. And varying the foreground color can make either the window or the message vanish and reappear later. There are, however, a couple of problems involved in using these windows. The character shape that you want to use might not have a screen code of less than 64. In that case, the only solution is to define your own character set, with the shape you want in one of the first 64 characters. Another problem is that characters within a PRINT statement in your program listing are not always going to look the same on the screen. Having to figure out what letter to print to get the number 4 with a certain background color can be very inconvenient. The easiest solution to this problem is to have a subroutine do the translation for you. Since letters will appear normally in window 1, and window 3 characters are simply window 1 characters reversed, you will only have problems with characters in windows 2 and 4. To convert these characters, put your message into A$, and use the following subroutine: 500 B$="":FOR 1=1 TO LEN( A$ ) :B=ASC(MID$ ( A$ , I , 1 ) ) 510 B=B+32iIF B<96 THEN B=B+96 520 B$=B$+CHR$(B) :NEXT I:RETURN This subroutine converts each letter to its ASCII equivalent, adds the proper offset, and converts it back to part of the new string, B$. When the conversion is complete, B$ will hold the characters necessary to PRINT that message in window 2. For window 4, PRINT CHR$(18); B$; CHR$(146). This will turn reverse video on before printing the string, and turn it off afterwards. A practical demonstration of the technique for setting up windows is given in the sample program below. The program sets up three windows, and shows them flashing, appearing and disappearing. 5 DIM RO$(25):RO$(0)=CHR$(19):FOR 1=1 TO 24:R0$(I) =R0$(I-1)+CHR$(17) :NEXT 136 53265 10 POKE 53265, PEEK( 53265) OR 64 20 POKE 53280,0: POKE 53281, 0:POKE 53282, 1:P0KE 53 283,2:P0KE 53284,13 25 OP$=CHR$(160) :FOR 1=1 TO 4 :0P$=0P$+0P$ :NEXTI : PR INTCHR$ ( 147 ) ; R0$ ( 3 ) ; 30 FOR 1=1 TO10:PRINTTAB(1);CHR$(18);"{15 SPACES}" ;TAB(23) ;OP$:NEXT 40 PRINT CHR$ ( 146 ): PRINT: PRINT: FOR 1=1 TO 4:PRINT0 P$ ; 0P$ ; 0P$ ; 0P$ ; 0P$ ; : NEXTI 50 PRINT RO$(5);CHR$(5);CHR$(18);TAB(2);"A RED WIN DOW" 60 PRINT CHR$(18);TAB(2);"COULD BE USED" 70 PRINT CHR$(18) ;TAB(2) ;"FOR ERROR" 80 PRINT CHR$( 18) ;TAB(2); "MESSAGES" 100 A$="A GREEN WINDOW" : GOSUB 300:PRINT R0§(5);CHR $(144) ;CHR$(18) ?TAB(24) ;B$ 110 A$="COULD BE USED": GOSUB 300 : PRINTTAB( 24) ; CHR$ (18);B$ 120 A$="TO GIVE":GOSUB 300 : PRINTTAB( 24) ;CHR$ ( 18) ;B $ 130 A$=" INSTRUCTIONS": GOSUB 300 : PRINTTAB( 24) ;CHR$ ( 18);B$ 140 PRINT CHR$(31) ;R0$(19) ; 150 A$="{2 SPACEsiwHILE THE MAIN WINDOW COULD BE U SED" :GOSUB300: PRINT B$ 160 A$="{2 SPACES}FOR ACCEPTING COMMANDS. ": GOSUB 30 0: PRINT B$ 170 FOR 1=1 TO 5000:NEXT I: POKE 53284,0 180 FOR 1=1 TO 5:F0R J=l TO 300:NEXT J: POKE 53282, 15 190 FOR J=l TO 300: NEXT J: POKE 53282,1 200 NEXT I: POKE 53283 , -2* ( PEEK( 53283 )=240) : POKE 5 3284, -13* (PEEK( 53284 )=240) 210 GOTO 180 300 B$="":FOR I=1T0LEN( A$ ) :B=ASC (MID$ ( A$ , I, 1 ) ) 310 B=B+32:IFB<96THENB=B+96 320 B$=B$+CHR$(B) :NEXTI:RETURN Bit 7. Bit 7 of this register is the high-order bit (Bit 8) of the Raster Compare register at 53266 ($D012). Even though it is located here, it functions as part of that register (see the description below for more information on the Raster Compare register). Machine language programmers should note that its position here at Bit 7 allows testing this bit with the Negative flag. Since scan lines above number 256 are all off the screen, this provides an easy way to delay changing the graphics display until the scan is in the vertical blanking interval and the display is no longer being drawn: LOOP LDA $D011 BPL LOOP 137 53266 Sprites should always be moved when the raster is scannir\g offscreen, because if they are moved while they are being scanned, their shapes waver slightly. The BASIC equivalent of the program fragment above is the statement WAIT 53265,128, but BASIC is usually not fast enough to execute the next statement while still in the blanking interval. 53266 $D012 RASTER Read Current Raster Scan Line/Write Line to Compare for Raster IRQ The Raster Compare register has two different functions, depending on whether you are reading from it or writing to it. When this register is read, it tells which screen line the electron beam is currently scanning. There are 262 horizontal lines which make up the American (NTSC) standard display screen (312 lines in the European or PAL standard screen). Every one of these lines is scanned and updated 60 times per second. Only 200 of these lines (numbers 50-249) are part of the visible display. It is sometimes helpful to know just what line is being scanned, because changing screen graphics on a particular line while that line is being scanned may cause a slight disruption on the screen. By reading this register, it is possible for a machine language program to wait until the scan is off the bottom of the screen before changing the graphics display. It is even possible for a machine language program to read this register, and change the screen display when a certain scan line is reached. The program below uses this technique to change the background color in midscreen, in order to show all 256 combinations of foreground and background text colors at once. 40 FOR 1=49152 TO 49188: READ A: POKE I, A: NEXT:PO KE 53280,11 50 PRINT CHR$(147) :FOR 1=1024 TO 1+1000: POKE 1,16 0: POKE 1+54272, 11 :NEXTI 60 FOR 1=0 TO 15: FOR J=0 TO 15 70 P=1196+(40*I)+J: POKE P,J+1: POKE P+54272,J: NE XT J, I 80 PRINT TAB(15)CHR$(5)"COLOR CHART": FOR 1=1 TO 19 . : PRINT: NEXT 85 PRINT "THIS CHART SHOWS ALL COMBINATIONS OF {3 SPACES}" 86 PRINT "FOREGROUND AND BACKGROUND COLORS. 1 6 SPACES}" 87 PRINT "FOREGROUND INCREASES FROM LEFT TO RIGHT" 88 PRINT "BACKGROUND INCREASES FROM TOP TO BOTTOM" 138 53266 90 SYS 12*4096 100 DATA 169,90,133,251,169,0,141,33,208,162,15,12 0,173,17,208,48 105 DATA 251,173,18,208 110 DATA 197,251,208,249,238,33,208,24,105,8,133,2 51,202,16,233,48,219 Writing to this register designates the comparison value for the Raster Compare Interrupt. When that interrupt is enabled, a maskable interrupt request will be issued every time the electron beam scan reaches the scan line whose number was written here. This is a much more flexible technique for changing the display in midscreen than reading this register as the sample program above does. That technique requires that the program continuously watch the Raster Register, while the interrupt method will call the program when the time is right to act. For more information on raster interrupts, see the entry for the Interrupt Mask Register, 53274 ($D01A). It is very important to remember that this register requires nine bits, and that this location holds only eight of those bits (the ninth is Bit 7 of 53265, $D011). If you forget to read or write to the ninth bit, your results could be in error by a factor of 256. For example, some early programs written to demonstrate the raster interrupt took for granted that the ninth bit of this register would be set to 0 on power-up. When a later version of the Kernal changed this initial value to a 1, their interrupt routines, which were supposed to set the raster interrupt to occur at scan line number 150, ended up setting it for line number 406 instead. Since the scan line numbers do not go up that high, no interrupt request was ever issued and the program did not work. Location Range: 53267-53268 ($D013$D014) Light Pen Registers A light pen is an input device that can be plugged into joystick Con trol Port #1. It is shaped like a pen and has a light-sensitive device at its tip that causes the trigger switch of the joystick port to close at the moment the electron beam that updates the screen display strikes it. The VIC-II chip keeps track of where the beam is when that happens, and records the corresponding horizontal and vertical screen coordinates in the registers at these locations. A program can read the position at which the light pen is held up to the screen. The values in these registers are updated once every screen frame (60 times per second). Once the switch is closed and a value written to these registers, the registers are latched, and subsequent switch closings during the same screen frame will not be recorded. 139 53267 A given light pen may not be entirely accurate (and the operator may not have a steady hand). It is probably wise to average the positions returned from a number of samplings, particularly when using a machine language driver. 53267 $D013 LPENX Light Pen Horizontal Position This location holds the horizontal position of the light pen. Since there are only eight bits available (which give a range of 256 values) for 320 possible horizontal screen positions, the value here is accurate only to every second dot position. The number here will range from 0 to 160 and must be multiplied by 2 in order to get a close approximation of the actual horizontal dot position of the light pen. 53268 $D014 LPENY Light Fen Vertical Position This location holds the vertical position of the light pen. Since there are only 200 visible scan lines on the screen, the value in this register corresponds exactly to the current raster scan line. 53269 $D015 SPENA sprite Enable Register Bit 0: Enable Sprite 0 (1= sprite is on, 0= sprite is off) Bit 1: Enable Sprite 1 (1= sprite is on, 0= sprite is off) Bit 2: Enable Sprite 2 (l=sprite is on, 0=sprite is off) Bit 3: Enable Sprite 3 (1= sprite is on, 0= sprite is of^ Bit 4: Enable Sprite 4 (1= sprite is on, 0= sprite is off) Bit 5: Enable Sprite 5 (1= sprite is on, 0= sprite is off) Bit 6: Enable Sprite 6 (l=sprite is on, 0=sprite is off) Bit 7: Enable Sprite 7 (1= sprite is on, 0= sprite is off) In order for any sprite to be displayed, the corresponding bit in this register must be set to 1 (the default for this location is 0). Of course, just setting this bit alone will not guarantee that a sprite will be shown on the screen. The Sprite Data Pointer must indicate a data area that holds some values other than 0. The Sprite Color Register must also contain a value other than that of the background color. In addition, the Sprite Horizontal and Vertical Position Registers must be set for positions that lie within the visible screen range in order for a sprite to appear on screen. 53270 $D016 SCROLX Horizontal Fine Scrolling and Control Register Bits 0-2: Fine scroll display horizontally by X dot positions (0-7) Bit 3: Select a 38-column or 40-column text display (1=40 columns, 0=38 columns) 140 n 1 1 □ n n 53270 Bit 4: Enable multicolor text or multicolor bitmap mode (1= multicolor on, 0= multicolor off) Bit 5: Video chip reset (0= normal operation, 1= video completely off) Bits 6-7: Unused This is one of the two important multifunction control registers on the VIC-II chip. On power-up, it is set to a default value of 8, which means that the VIC chip Reset line is set for a normal display. Multicolor Mode is disabled, a 40-column text display is selected, and no horizontal fine-scroll offset is used. Bits 0-2. The first three bits of this chip control vertical fine scrolling of the screen display. This feature allows you to smoothly move the entire text display back and forth, enabling the display area to act as a window, scrolling over a larger text or character graphics display. Since each text character is eight dots wide, moving each character over one whole character position (known as coarse scrolling) is a relatively big jump, and the motion looks jerky. By placing a number from 1 to 7 into these three bits, you can move the whole screen display from one to seven dot spaces to the right. Stepping through values 1 to 7 allows you to smoothly make the transition from having a character appear at one screen column to having it appear at the next one over. To demonstrate this, type in the following program, LIST, and RUN it. 10 FOR 1= 1 TO 50: FOR J=0 TO 7 20 POKE 53270, (PEEK( 53270) AND248) OR J:NEXTJ,I 30 FOR 1= 1 TO 50: FOR 3-1 TO 0 STEP-1 40 POKE 53270, (PEEK( 53270) AND248) OR J:NEXTJ,I As you can see, after the display has moved over seven dots, it starts over at its original position. In order to continue the scroll, you must do a coarse scroll every time the value of the scroll bits goes from 7 to 0, or from 0 to 7. This is accomplished by moving each byte of display data on each line over one position, overwriting the last character, and introducing a new byte of data on the opposite end of the screen line to replace it. Obviously, only a machine language program can move all of these bytes quickly enough to maintain the effect of smooth motion. The following BASIC program, however, will give you an idea of what the combination of fine and coarse scrolling looks like. 10 POKE 53281,0:PRINTCHR$(5) ;CHR$(147) :FOR 1=1 TO {SPACE}5:PRINTCHR$(17) :NEXT 20 F0RI=1 TO 30 30 PRINT TAB(I-1)"{UP} {10 SPACES}{UP}" 40 WAIT53265,128:POKE53270,PEEK(53270)AND248:PR1NT TAB(I)"AWAY WE GO" 141 53270 50 FOR J=l TO 7 60 POKE53270, {PEEK( 53270 )AND248)+J 70 FORK=1TO30-I 80 NEXT K,J,I:RUN Changing the value of the three horizontal scroll bits will affect the entire screen display. If you wish to scroll only a portion of the screen, you will have to use raster interrupts (see 53274, $D01A below) to establish a scroll zone, change the value of these scroll bits only when that zone is being displayed, and change it back to 0 afterward. Bit 3. Bit 3 of this register allows you to cover up the first and last columns of the screen display with the border. Since the viewers cannot see the characters there, they will not be able to see you insert a new character on the end of the line when you do coarse scrolling (see explanation of Bits 0-2 above). Setting this bit to 1 enables the normal 40-column display, while resetting it to 0 changes the display to 38 columns. This is purely a cosmetic aid, and it is not necessary to change the screen to the smaller size to use the scrolling feature. Bit 4. This bit selects multicolor graphics. The effect of setting this bit to 1 depends on whether or not the bitmap graphics mode is also enabled. If you are not in bitmap mode, and you select multicolor text character mode by setting this bit to 1, characters with a color nybble whose value is less than 8 are displayed normally. There will be one background color and one foreground color. But each dot of a character with a color nybble whose value is over 7 can have any one of four different colors. The two colors in Background Color Registers 1 and 2 (53282-3, $D022-3) are available in addition to the colors supplied by the Color RAM. The price of these extra colors is a reduction in horizontal resolution. Instead of each bit controlling one dot, in multicolor mode a pair of bits control the color of a larger dot. Thus, each character is eight dots across; multicolor characters are only four doublewidth dots across. A bit pattern of 00 will put the color from Background Color Register 0 into that dot. A pattern of 11 will light it with the color from the lower three bits of color RAM. Patterns of 01 and 10 will select the colors from Background Color Registers 1 and 2, respectively, for the double-width dot. You caii see the effect that setting this bit has by typing in the following BASIC command line: POKE 53270,PEEK(53270)OR16: PRINT CHR$(149)"THIS IS MULTICOLOR MODE" It is obvious from this example that the normal set of text characters was not made to be used in multicolor mode. In order to take advan142 n n n n n n n n 53270 tage of this mode, you will need to design custom four-color characters. For more information, see the alternate entry for 53248 ($D000), the Character Generator ROM. If the multicolor and bitmap enable bits are both set to 1, the result is multicolor bitmap mode. As in multicolor text mode, pairs of graphics data bits are used to set each dot in a 4 by 8 matrix to one of four colors. This results in a reduction of the horizontal resolution to 160 double-wide dots across. But while text multicolor mode allows only one of the four colors to be set individually for each 4 by 8 dot area, bitmap multicolor mode allows up to three different colors to be individually selected in each 4 by 8 dot area. The source of the dot color for each bit-pair combination is shown below: 00 Background Color Register 0 (53281, $D021) 01 Upper four bits of Video Matrix 10 Lower four bits of Video Matrix 11 Color RAM nybble (area starts at 55296, $D800) The fact that bit-pairs are used in this mode changes the strategy for plotting somewhat. In order to find the byte BY in which the desired bit-pair resides, you must multiply the horizontal position X, which has a value of 0-159, by 2, and then use the same formula as for hi-res bitmap mode. Given that the horizontal position (0-159) of the dot is stored in the variable X, its vertical position is in the variable Y, and the base address of the bitmap area is in the variable BASE. You can find the desired byte with the formula: BY=BASE+(Y AND 248)*40+(Y AND 7)-l-(2*X AND 504) Setting the desired bit-pair will depend on what color you choose. First, you must set up an array of bit masks. CA(0)=1:CA(1)=4:CA(2)=16:CA(3)=64 To turn on the desired dot, select a color CO from 0 to 3 (representing the color selected by the corresponding bit pattern) and execute the following statement: BI=(NOT X AND 3): POKE BY, PEEK(BY) AND (NOT 3*CA(B1)) OR (CO*CA(BI)) The following program will demonstrate this technique: 10 CA(0)=1:CA(1)=4:CA(2)=16:CA(3)=64:REM ARRAY FOR BXT PAIRS 20 BASE=2*4096:POKE53272,PEEK(53272)OR8:REM PUT BI T MAP AT 8192 30 POKE53265,PEEK( 53265 )OR32: POKE 53270, PEEK( 53270 )0R16:REM MULTI-COLOR BIT MAP 40 A$="":FOR 1=1 TO 37 :A$=A$+"C" :NEXT: PRINT CHR$(1 9); 143 53271 U U 50 FOR 1=1 TO 27 : PRINTA$ ;: NEXT: POKE 2023, PEEK( 2022 i ; ) : REM SET COLOR MAP ! 1 60 A$="":FOR 1=1 TO 128:A$=A$+"@" :NEXT:FOR 1=32 TO 63 STEP 2 70 POKE648,1jPRINTCHR$(19) fA$;A$;A$;A$:NEXT:P0KE64 } '■ 8, 4: REM CLR HI-RES SCREEN 80 FOR C0=1 T03i FORY=0TO199STEP.5:REM FROM THE TO P OF THE SCREEN TO THE BOTTOM . , 90 X=INT(10*CO+50+15*SlN(CO*45+Y/l0)) : REM SINE WA | j VE SHAPE 100 BY=BASE+40*(Y AND 248)+(Y AND 7)+(X*2 AND 504) : REM FIND HI-RES BYTE 110 BI=(NOT X AND 3):P0KE BY,PEEK(BY) AND (NOT 3*C A(BI)) OR (C0*CA(BI)) 120 NEXT Y,CO 130 GOTO 130: REM LET IT STAY ON SCREEN Bit 5. Bit 5 controls the VIC-II chip Reset line. Setting this bit to 1 will completely stop the video chip from operating. On older 64s, the screen will go black. It should always be set to 0 to insure normal operation of the chip. Bits 6 and 7. These bits are not used. 53271 $D017 YXPAND Sprite Vertical Expansion Register Bit 0: Expand Sprite 0 vertically (1= double height, 0= normal height) Bit 1: Expand Sprite 1 vertically (l=double height, O=normal height) Bit 2: Expand Sprite 2 vertically (1= double height, 0= normal height) Bit 3: Expand Sprite 3 vertically (l=double height, O=normal height) Bit 4: Expand Sprite 4 vertically (l=double height, O=normal height) \ I Bit 5: Expand Sprite 5 vertically (1= double height, 0= normal ' — ^ height) Bit 6: Expand Sprite 6 vertically (l=double height, O=normal i , height) I i Bit 7: Expand Sprite 7 vertically (1= double height, 0= normal height) This register can be used to double the height of any sprite. When the bit in this register that corresponds to a particular sprite is set to 1, each dot of the 24 by 21 sprite dot matrix will become two raster scan lines high instead of one. u I > 144 U 53272 53272 $D018 VMCSB VIC-II Chip Memory Control Register Bit 0: Unused Bits 1-3: Text character dot-data base address within VIC-II address space Bits 4-7: Video matrix base address within VIC-II address space This register affects virtually all graphics operations. It determines the base address of two very important data areas, the Video Matrix, and the Character Dot-Data area. Bits 1-3. These bits are used to set the location of the Character Dot-Data area. This area is where the data that defines the shapes of the characters displayed on the screen is stored (for more information on character shape data, see the alternate entry for location 53248 ($D000), the Character Generator ROM). Bits 1-3 can represent any even number from 0 to 14. That number stands for the even IK offset of the character data area from the beginning of VIC-II memory. For example, if these bits are all set to 0, it means that character memory occupies the first 2K of VIC-II memory. If they equal 2, the data area starts 2*1K (2*1024) or 2048 bytes from the beginning of VIC memory. The default value of this nybble is 4. This sets the address of the Character Dot-Data area to 4096 ($1000), which is the starting address of where the VIC-II chip addresses the Character ROM. The normal character set which contains uppercase and graphics occupies the first 2K of that ROM. The alternate character set which contains both upper- and lowercase letters uses the second 2K. Therefore, to shift to the alternate character set, you must change the value of this nybble to 6, with a POKE 53272,PEEK(53272)OR2. To change it back, POKE 53272,PEEK(53272)AND253. In bitmap mode, the lower nybble controls the location of the bitmap screen data. Since this data area can start only at an offset of 0 or 8K from the beginning of VIC-II memory, only Bit 3 of the Memory Control Register is significant in bitmap mode. If Bit 3 holds a 0, the offset is 0, and if it holds a 1, the offset is 8192 (BK). Bits 4-7. This nybble determines the starting address of the Video Matrix area. This is the 1024-byte area of memory which contains the screen codes for the text characters that are displayed on the screen. In addition, the last eight bytes of this area are used as pointers which designate which 64-byte block of VIC-II memory will be used as shape data for each sprite. These four bits can represent numbers from 0 to 15. These numbers stand for the offset (in IK increments) from the beginning of VIC-II memory to the Video Matrix. For example, the default bit pattern is 0001. This indicates that the Video Matrix is offset by IK from the beginning of VIC-II memory, 145 53273 the normal starting place for screen memory. Remember, though, the bit value of this number will be 16 times what the bit pattern indicates, because we are dealing with Bits 4-7. Therefore, the 0001 in the upper nybble has a value of 16. Using this register, we can move the start of screen memory to any IK boundary within the 16K VIC-II memory area. Just changing this register, however, is not enough if you want to use the BASIC line editor. The editor looks to location 648 ($288) to determine where to print screen characters. If you just change the location of the Video Matrix without changing the value in 648, BASIC will continue to print characters in the memory area starting at 1024, even though that area is no longer being displayed. The result is that you will not be able to see anything that you type in on the keyboard. To fix this, you must POKE 648 with the page number of the starting address of screen memory (page number=location/256). Remember, the actual starting address of screen memory depends not only on the offset from the beginning of VIC-II memory in the register, but also on which bank of 16K is used for VIC-II memory. For example, if the screen area starts 1024 bytes from the beginning of VIC-II memory, and the video chip is using Bank 2 (3276849151), the actual starting address of screen memory is 32768+1024=33792 ($8400). For examples of how to change the video memory area, and of how to relocate the screen, see the entry for 56576 ($DDOO). 53273 $D019 VICIRa VIC Interrupt Flag Register Bit 0: Flag: Is the Raster Compare a possible source of an IRQ? (l=yes) Bit 1: Flag: Is a collision between a sprite and the normal graphics display a possible source of an IRQ? (l=yes) Bit 2: Flag: Is a collision between two sprites a possible source of an IRQ? (l=yes) Bit 3: Flag: Is the light pen trigger a possible source of an IRQ? (l=yes) Bits 4-6: Not used Bit 7: Flag: Is there any VIC-II chip IRQ source which could cause an IRQ? (l=yes) The VIC-II chip is capable of generating a maskable request (IRQ) when certain conditions relating to the video display are fulfilled. Briefly, the conditions that can cause a VIC-II chip IRQ are: 1. The line number of the current screen line being scanned by the raster is the same as the line number value written to the Raster Register (53266, $D012). 146 53274 2. A sprite is positioned at the same location where normal graphics data are being displayed. 3. Two sprites are positioned so that they are touching. 4. The light sensor on the light pen has been struck by the raster beam, causing the fire button switch on joystick Control Port #1 to close (pressing the joystick fire button can have the same effect). When one of these conditions is met, the corresponding bit in this status register is set to 1 and latched. That means that as long as the corresponding enable bit in the VIC IRQ Mask register is set to 1, an IRQ request will be generated, and any subsequent fulfillment of the same condition will be ignored until the latch is cleared. This allows you to preserve multiple interrupt requests if more than one of the interrupt conditions is met at a time. In order to keep an IRQ source from generating another request after it has been serviced, and to enable subsequent interrupt conditions to be detected, the interrupt service routine must write a 1 to the corresponding bit. This will clear the latch for that bit. The default value written to this register is 15, which clears all interrupts. There is only one IRQ vector that points to the address of the routine that will be executed when an IRQ interrupt occurs. The same routine will therefore be executed regardless of the source of the interrupt. This status register provides a method for that routine to check what the source of the IRQ was, so that the routine can take appropriate action. First, the routine can check Bit 7. Anytime that any of the other bits in the status register is set to 1, Bit 7 will also be set. Therefore, if that bit holds a 1, you know that the VIC-II chip requested an IRQ (the two CIA chips which are the other sources of IRQ interrupts can be checked in a similar manner). Once it has been determined that the VIC chip is responsible for the IRQ, the individual bits can be tested to see which of the IRQ conditions have been met. For more information, and a sample VIC IRQ program, see the following entry. 53274 $D01A IRClMSK IRQ Mask Register Bit 0: Enable Raster Compare IRQ (1= interrupt enabled) Bit 1: Enable IRQ to occur when sprite collides with display of normal graphics data (l=interrupt enabled) Bit 2: Enable IRQ to occur when two sprites collide (l=interrupt enabled) Bit 3: Enable light pen to trigger an IRQ (l=interrupt enabled) Bits 4-7: Not used This register is used to enable an IRQ request to occur when one of the VIC-II chip interrupt conditions is met. In order to understand 147 53274 LI what that means, and how these interrupts can extend the range of ^ i options available to a programmer, you must first understand what i ! an interrupt is. An interrupt is a signal given to the microprocessor (the brains of the computer) that tells it to stop executing its machine language j | program (for example, BASIC), and to work on another program for a short time, perhaps only a fraction of a second. After finishing the interrupt program, the computer goes back to executing the main [ I program, just as if there had never been a detour. ' — ' Bit 0. This bit enables the Raster Compare IRQ. The conditions for this IRQ are met when the raster scan reaches the video line indicated by the value written to the Raster Register at 53266 ($D012) and Bit 7 of 53265 ($D011). Again, an explanation of the terminology is in order. In the normal TV display, a beam of electrons (raster) scans the screen, starting in the top-left comer, and moving in a straight line to the right, lighting up appropriate parts of the screen line on the way. When it comes to the right edge, the beam moves down a line, and starts again from the left. There are 262 such lines that are scanned by the 64 display, 200 of which form the visible screen area. This scan updates the complete screen display 60 times every second. The VIC-II chip keeps track of which line is being scanned, and stores the scan number in the Raster Register at 53266 and 53265 ($D012 and $D011). The Raster Register has two functions. When read, it tells what line is presently being scanned. But when written to, it designates a particular scan line as the place where a raster interrupt will occur. At the exact moment that the raster beam line number equals the number written to the register, Bit 0 of the status register will be set to 1, showing that the conditions for a Raster Compare Interrupt have been fulfilled. If the raster interrupt is enabled then, simultaneously, the interrupt program wDl be executed. This allows the user to reset any of the VIC-II registers at any point in the display, and | j thus change character sets, background color, or graphics mode for i — > only a part of the screen display. The interrupt routine will first check if the desired condition is the source of the interrupt (see the above entry) and then make the | ( changes to the screen display. Once you have written this interrupt routine, you must take the following steps to install it. 1. Set the interrupt disable flag in the status register with an SEI [ | instruction. This will disable all interrupts and prevent the system from crashing while you are changing the interrupt vectors. 2. Enable the raster interrupt. This is done by setting Bit 0 of the } ' VIC-II chip interrupt enable register at location 53274 ($D01A) to 1. ' — ' 148 U 53274 3. Indicate the scan line on which you want the interrupt to occur by writing to the raster registers. Don't forget that this is a ninebit value, and you must set both the low byte (in location 53266, $D012) and the high bit (in the register at 53265, $D011) in order to insure that the interrupt will start at the scan line you want it to, and not 256 lines earlier or later. 4. Let the computer know where the machine language routine that you want the interrupt to execute starts. This is done by placing the address in the interrupt vector at locations 788-789 ($314-$315). This address is split into two parts, a low byte and a high byte, with the low byte stored at 788. To calculate the two values for a given address AD, you may use the formula HIBYTE=INT(AD/256) and LOWBYTE=AD(HIBYTE*256). The value LOWBYTE would go into location 788, and the value HIBYTE would go into location 789. 5. Reenable interrupts with a CLI instruction, which clears the interrupt disable flag on the status register. When the computer is first turned on, the interrupt vector is set to point to the normal hardware timer interrupt routine, the one that advances the jiffy clock and reads the keyboard. Since this interrupt routine uses the same vector as the raster interrupt routine, it is best to turn off the hardware timer interrupt by putting a value of 127 in location 56333 ($DCOD). If you want the keyboard and jiffy clock to function normally while your interrupt is enabled, you must preserve the contents of locations 788 and 789 before you change them to point to your new routine. Then you must have your interrupt routine jump to the old interrupt routine exactly once per screen refresh (every 1 /60 second). Another thing that you should keep in mind is that at least two raster interrupts are required if you want to change only a part of the screen. Not only must the interrupt routine change the display, but it must also set up another raster interrupt that will change it back. The sample program below uses a raster-scan interrupt to divide the display into three sections. The first 80 scan lines are in highresolution bitmap mode, the next 40 are regular text, and the last 80 are in multicolor bitmap mode. The screen will split this way as soon as a SYS to the routine that turns on the interrupt occurs. The display will stay split even after the program ends. Only if you hit the STOP and RESTORE keys together will the display return to normal. The interrupt uses a table of values that are POKEd into four key locations during each of the three interrupts, as well as values to determine at what scan lines the interrupts will occur. The locations affected are Control Register 1 (53265, $D011), Control Register 2 (53270, $D016), the Memory Control Register (53272, $D018), and 149 53274 Background Color 0 (53281, $D021). The data for the interrupt routine is contained in lines 49152-49276. Each of these line numbers corresponds to the locations where the first data byte in the statement is POKEd into memory. If you look at lines 49264-49276 of the BASIC program, you will see REMark statements that explain which VIC-II registers are affected by the DATA statements in each line. The numbers in these DATA statements appear in the reverse order in which they are put into the VIC register. For example, line 49273 holds the data that will go into Control Register 2. The last number, 8, is the one that will be placed into Control Register 2 while the top part of the screen is displayed. The first number, 24, is placed into Control Register 2 during the bottom part of the screen display, and changes that portion of the display to multicolor mode. The only tricky part in determining which data byte affects which interrupt comes in line 49264, which holds the data that determines the scan line at which each interrupt will occur. Each DATA statement entry reflects the scan line at which the next interrupt will occur. The first item in line 49264 is 49. Even though this is the entry for the third interrupt, this number corresponds to the top of the screen (only scan lines 50-249 are visible on the display). That is because after the third interrupt, the next to be generated is the first interrupt, which occurs at the top of the screen. Likewise, the last data item of 129 is used during the first interrupt to start the next interrupt at scan line 129. Try experimenting with these values to see what results you come up with. For example, if you change the number 170 to 210, you will increase the text area by five lines (40 scan lines). By changing the values in the data tables, you can alter the effect of each interrupt. Change the 20 in line 49276 to 22, and you will get lowercase text in the middle of the screen. Change the first 8 in line 49273 to 24, and you'll get multicolor text in the center window. Each of these table items may be used exactly like you would use the corresponding register, in order to change background color, to obtain text or bitmap graphics, regular or multicolor modes, screen blanking or extended background color mode. It is even possible to change the table values during a program, by POKEing the new value into the memory location where those table values are stored. In that way, you can, for example, change the background color of any of the screen parts while the program is running. 5 FOR 1=0 TO 7:BI(I)=2tljNEXT 10 FOR 1=49152 TO 49278: READ A:POKE I,A:NEXT:SYS1 2*4096 20 PRINT CHR$(147) :FOR 1=0 TO 8:PRINT:NEXT 150 53274 30 PRINT "THE TOP AREA IS HIGH-RES BIT MAP MODE" 40 PRINT; PRINT "THE MIDDLE AREA IS ORDINARY TEXT " 50 PRINT: PRINT"THE BOTTOM AREA IS MULTI-COLOR BIT {SPACE} MAP" 60 PORG=1384 TO 1423: POKE G,6:NEXT 70 FORG=1024 TO 1383 s POKEG, 114: POKE G+640, 234: NEXT 80 A$="":FOR 1=1 TO 128:A$=A$+"@" :NEXT:FOR 1=32 TO 63 STEP 2 90 POKE 648,1:PRINT CHR$ ( 19 )CHR$ ( 153 ) ; A$ ; A$; A$ ; A$ : NEXT: POKE 648,4 100 BASE=2*4096:BK=49267 110 H=40 :C=0 : FORX=0TO319:GOSUB150 :NEXT 120 H=160:C=0iFORX=0TO319STEP2:GOSOB150jNEXTjC=40 125 FORX=1TO319STEP2:GOSUB150:NEXT 130 C=80:FOR X=0 TO 319 STEP2:W=0:GOSUB150:W=l:GOS UB150:NEXT 140 GOTO 140 150 Y=INT(H+20*SIN(X/10+C) ) :BY=BASE+40*(Y AND 248) +(Y AND 7)+(X AND 504) 160 POKE BY,PEEK(BY) OR (BI ( ABS ( 7-(XAND7 ) -W) ) ) :RET URN 49152 DATA 120, 169, 127, 141, 13, 220 49158 DATA 169, 1, 141, 26, 208, 169 49164 DATA 3, 133, 251, 173, 112, 192 49170 DATA 141, 18, 208, 169, 24, 141 49176 DATA 17, 208, 173, 20, 3, 141 49182 DATA 110, 192, 173, 21, 3, 141 49188 DATA 111, 192, 169, 50, 141, 20 49194 DATA 3, 169, 192, 141, 21, 3 49200 DATA 88, 96, 173, 25, 208, 141 49206 DATA 25, 208, 41, 1, 240, 43 49212 DATA 198, 251, 16, 4, 169, 2 49218 DATA 133, 251, 166, 251, 189, 115 49224 DATA 192, 141, 33, 208, 189, 118 49230 DATA 192, 141, 17, 208, 189, 121 49236 DATA 192, 141, 22, 208, 189, 124 49242 DATA 192, 141, 24, 208, 189, 112 49248 DATA 192, 141, 18, 208, 138, 240 49254 DATA 6, 104, 168, 104, 170, 104 49260 DATA 64, 76, 49, 234 49264 DATA 49, 170, 129 :REM SCAN LINES 49267 DATA 0, 6, 0:REM BACKGROUND COLOR 49270 DATA 59, 27,59:REM CONTROL REG. 1 49273 DATA 24, 8, 8:REM CONTROL REG. 2 49276 DATA 24, 20, 24: REM MEMORY CONTROLRUN Besides enabling the creation of mixed graphics-modes saeens, the Raster Compare Interrupt is also useful for creating scrolling zones, so that some parts of the screen can be fine-scrolled while the rest remains stationary. 53275 Bit 1 enables the light pen intemipt. This interrupt can occur when the light of the raster beam strikes the light-sensitive device in the pen's tip, causing it to close the fire button switch on joystick Controller Port #1. The light pen interrupt affords a method of signaling to a program that the pen is being held to the screen, and that its position can be read. Some light pens provide a push-button switch which grounds one of the other lines on the joystick port. This switch can be pressed by the user as an additional signal that the pen is properly positioned. Its location can then be read in the light pen position registers (53267-8, $D013-4). Bit 2 enables the sprite-foreground collision interrupt. This interrupt can occur if one of the sprite character's dots is touching one of the dots from the foreground display of either text character or bitmap graphics. Bit 3 enables the sprite-sprite collision interrupt, which can occur if one of the sprite character's dots is touching one of the dots of another sprite character. These two interrupts are useful for games, where such collisions often require that some action be taken immediately. Once the interrupt signals that a collision has occurred, the interrupt routine can check the Sprite-Foreground Collision Register at 53279 ($D01F), or the Sprite-Sprite Collision Register at 53278 ($D01E), to see which sprite or sprites are involved in the collision. See the entry for those locations for more details on collisions. 53275 $D01B SPBGPR sprite to Foreground Display Priority Register Bit 0: Select display priority of Sprite 0 to foreground (0= sprite appears in front of foreground) Bit 1: Select display priority of Sprite 1 to foreground (0= sprite appears in front of foreground) Bit 2: Select display priority of Sprite 2 to foreground (0=sprite appears in front of foreground) Bit 3: Select display priority of Sprite 3 to foreground (0= sprite appears in front of foreground) Bit 4: Select display priority of Sprite 4 to foreground (0= sprite appears in front of foreground) Bit 5: Select display priority of Sprite 5 to foreground (0= sprite appears in front of foreground) Bit 6: Select display priority of Sprite 6 to foreground (0= sprite appears in front of foreground) Bit 7: Select display priority of Sprite 7 to foreground (0= sprite appears in front of foreground) If a sprite is positioned to appear at a spot on the screen that is al 152 I 1 n 53276 ready occupied by text or bitmap graphics, a conflict arises. The contents of this register determines which one will be displayed in such a situation. If the bit that corresponds to a particular sprite is set to ^ 0, the sprite will be displayed in front of the foreground graphics ' * data. If that bit is set to 1, the foreground data will be displayed in front of the sprite. The default value that this register is set to at r**^ power-on is 0, so all sprites start out with priority over foreground graphics. Note that for the purpose of priority, the 01 bit-pair of multicolor graphics modes is considered to display a background color, and therefore will be shown behind sprite graphics even if the foreground graphics data takes priority. Also, between the sprites themselves there is a fixed priority. Each sprite has priority over all higher-number sprites, so that Sprite 0 is displayed in front of all the others. The use of priority can aid in creating three-dimensional effects, by allowing some objects on the screen to pass in front of or behind other objects. 53276 $D01C SPMC sprite Multicolor Registers Bit 0: Select multicolor mode for Sprite 0 (l=multicolor, 0=hi-res) Bit 1: Select multicolor mode for Sprite 1 (1 =multicolor, 0=hi-res) Bit 2: Select multicolor mode for Sprite 2 (1 =multicolor, 0=hi-res) Bit 3: Select multicolor mode for Sprite 3 (1= multicolor, 0=hi-res) Bit 4: Select multicolor mode for Sprite 4 (l=multicolor, 0=hi-res) Bit 5: Select multicolor mode for Sprite 5 (1= multicolor, 0=hi-res) Bit 6: Select multicolor mode for Sprite 6 (1= multicolor, 0=hi-res) Bit 7: Select multicolor mode for Sprite 7 (1 =multicolor, 0=hi-res) Sprite multicolor mode is very similar to text and bitmap multicolor modes (see Bit 4 of 53270, $D016). Normally, the color of each dot of the sprite display is controlled by a single bit of sprite shape data. When this mode is enabled for a sprite, by setting the corresponding bit of this register to 1, the bits of sprite shape data are grouped together in pairs, with each pair of bits controlling a double-wide dot of the sprite display. By sacrificing some of the horizontal resolution (the sprite, although the same size, is now only 12 dots wide), you gain the use of two additional colors. The four possible combinations of these bit-pairs display dot colors from the following sources: 00 Background Color Register 0 (transparent) 01 Sprite Multicolor Register 0 (53285, $D025) 10 Sprite Color Registers (53287-94, $D027-E) 11 Sprite Multicolor Register 1 (53286, $D026) Like multicolor text characters, multicolor sprites all share two color I \ 153 53277 registers. While each sprite can display three foreground colors, only one of these colors is unique to that sprite. The number of unique colors may be increased by combining more than one sprite into a single character. 53277 $D01D XXPAND Sprite Horizontal Expansion Register Bit 0: Expand Sprite. 0 horizontally (1= double-width sprite, 0= normal width) Bit 1: Expand Sprite 1 horizontally (1= double-width sprite, 0= normal width) Bit 2: Expand Sprite 2 horizontally (l=double- width sprite, 0= normal width) Bit 3: Expand Sprite 3 horizontally (1= double-width sprite, 0 = normal width) Bit 4: Expand Sprite 4 horizontally (1= double- width sprite, 0= normal width) Bit 5: Expand Sprite 5 horizontally (1= double-width sprite, 0= normal width) Bit 6: Expand Sprite 6 horizontally (1= double-width sprite, 0= normal width) Bit 7: Expand Sprite 7 horizontally (l=double- width sprite, 0= normal width) This register can be used to double the width of any sprite. Setting any bit of this register to 1 will cause each dot of the corresponding sprite shape to be displayed twice as wide as normal, so that without changing its horizontal resolution, the sprite takes up twice as much space. The horizontal expansion feature can be used alone, or in combination with the vertical expansion register at 53271 ($D017). Location Range: 53278-53279 ($D01E$D01F) Sprite Collision Detection Registers While Bit 2 of the VIC IRQ Register at 53273 ($D019) is set to 1 anytime two sprites overlap, and Bit 1 is set to 1 when a sprite shape is touching the foreground text or bit-graphics display, these registers specify which sprites were involved in the collision. Every bit that is set to 1 indicates that the corresponding sprite was involved in the collision. Reading these registers clears them so that they can detect the next collision. Therefore, if you plan to make multiple tests on the values stored here, it may be necessary to copy it to a RAM variable for further reference. 154 53278 Note that while these registers tell you what sprites were involved in a collision, they do not necessarily tell you what objects have collided with each other. It is quite possible to have three sprites lined up in a row, where Sprite A is on the left. Sprite B is in the middle, touching Sprite A, and Sprite C is on the right, touching Sprite B but not touching Sprite A. The Sprite-Sprite Collision register would show that all three are involved. The only way to make absolutely certain which collided with which is to check the position of each sprite, and calculate for each sprite display line if a sprite of that size would touch either of the others. As you can imagine, this is no easy task. There are a few simple rules concerning what does or does not cause a collision. Though the sprite character consists of 504 dots in a 24 by 21 matrix, dots which represent data bits that are equal to 0 (or multicolor bit-pairs equal to 00), and therefore always displayed in the background color, do not count when it comes to collision. A collision can occur only if a dot which represents a sprite shape data bit of 1 touches another dot of nonzero graphics data. Consider the case of two invisible sprites. The first sprite is enabled, its color is set to contrast the background, and it is positioned on the screen, but its shape data bytes are all 0. This sprite can never be involved in a collision, because it displays no nonzero data. The second sprite is enabled, positioned on the screen, and its shape pointer set for a data read that is filled with bytes having a value of 255. Even if that sprite's color is set to the same value as the background color, making the sprite invisible, it can still be involved in collisions. The only exception to this rule is the 01 bit-pair of multicolor graphics data. This bit-pair is considered part of the background, and the dot it displays can never be involved in a collision. The other rule to remember about collisions is that they can occur in areas that are covered by the screen border. Collision between sprites can occur when the sprites are offscreen, and collisions between sprites and foreground display data can occur when that data is in an area that is coverred by the border due to the reduction of the display to 38 columns or 24 rows. 53278 $D01E SPSPCL sprite to Sprite Collision Register Bit 0: Did Sprite 0 collide with another sprite? (l=yes) Bit 1: Did Sprite 1 collide with another sprite? (l=yes) Bit 2: Did Sprite 2 collide with another sprite? (l=yes) Bit 3: Did Sprite 3 collide with another sprite? (l=yes) Bit 4: Did Sprite 4 collide with another sprite? (l=yes) Bit 5: Did Sprite 5 collide with another sprite? (l=yes) Bit 6: Did Sprite 6 collide with another sprite? (l=yes) Bit 7: Did Sprite 7 collide with another sprite? (l=yes) 155 53279 53279 $D01F SPBGCL Sprite to Foreground Collision Register Bit 0: Did Sprite 0 collide with the foreground display? (l=yes) Bit 1: Did Sprite 1 collide with the foreground display? (l=yes) Bit 2: Did Sprite 2 collide with the foreground display? (l=yes) Bit 3: Did Sprite 3 collide with the foreground display? (l=yes) Bit 4: Did Sprite 4 collide with the foreground display? (l=yes) Bit 5: Did Sprite 5 collide with the foreground display? (l=yes) Bit 6: Did Sprite 6 collide with the foreground display? (l=yes) Bit 7: Did Sprite 7 collide with the foreground display? (l=yes) Location Range: 53280-53294 ($D020$D02E) VIC-n Color Register ^ ' Although these color registers are used for various purposes, all of them have one thing in common. Like the Color RAM Nybbles, only the lower four bits are connected. Therefore, when reading these registers, you must mask out the upper four bits (that is, BORDERCOLOR=PEEK(53280 AND 15)) in order to get a true reading. 53280 $D020 EXTCOL Border Color Register The color value here determines the color of the border or frame around the central display area. The entire screen is set to this color when the blanking feature of Bit 4 of 53265 ($D011) is enabled. The default color value is 14 (light blue). 53281 $D021 BGCOLO Background Color 0 This register sets the background color for all text modes, sprite graphics, and multicolor bitmap graphics. The default color value is 6 (blue). 53282 $D022 BGCOLl Background Color 1 This register sets the color for the 01 bit-pair of multicolor character graphics, and the background color for characters having screen codes 64-127 in extended background color text mode. The default color value is 1 (white). 53283 $D023 BGC0L2 Background Color 2 This register sets the color for the 10 bit-pair of multicolor character graphics, and the background color for characters having screen 156 53292 r**? codes 128-191 in extended background color text mode. The default ■ ' color value is 2 (red). ^ 53284 $D024 BGCOL3 > \ Background Color 3 This register sets the background color for characters having screen ^ codes between 192 and 255 in extended background color text mode. I J The default color value is 3 (cyan). 53285 $D025 SPMCO sprite Multicolor Register 0 This register sets the color that is displayed by the 01 bit-pair in multicolor sprite graphics. The default color value is 4 (purple). 53286 $D026 SPMCl sprite Multicolor Register 1 This register sets the color that is displayed by the 11 bit-pair in multicolor sprite graphics. The default color value is 0 (black). Location Range: 53287-53294 ($D027$D02E) Sprite Color Registers These registers are used to set the color to be displayed by bits of hires sprite data having a value of 1, and by bit-pairs of multicolor sprite data having a value of 10. The color of each sprite is determined by its own individual color register. 53287 $D027 SPOCOL Sprite 0 Color Register (the default color value is 1, white) 53288 $D028 SPICOL Sprite 1 Color Register (the default color value is 2, red) 53289 $D029 SP2COL Sprite 2 Color Register (the default color value is 3, cyan) 53290 $D02A SP3COL Sprite 3 Color Register (the default color value is 4, purple) n 53291 $D02B SP4COL sprite 4 Color Register (the default color value is 5, green) n 53292 $D02C SP5COL Sprite 5 Color Register (the default color value is 6, blue) * 157 n 53293 53293 $D02D SP6COL sprite 6 Color Register (the default color value is 7, yellow) 53294 $D02E SP7COL Sprite 7 Color Register (the default color value is 12, medium gray) Location Range: 53295-53311 ($D02F$D03F) Not Connected The VIC-II chip has only 47 registers for 64 bytes of possible address space. Therefore, the remaining 17 addresses do not access any memory. When read, they will always give a value of 255 ($FF). This value will not change after writing to them. Location Range: 53312-54271 ($D040$D3FF) VIC-II Register Images Since the VIC-II requires only enough addressing lines to handle 64 locations (the minimum possible for its 47 registers), none of the higher bits are decoded when addressing this IK area. The result is that every 64-byte area in this IK block is a mirror of every other. POKE53281-l-64,l has the same effect as POKE 53281,1 or POKE 53281 + 10*64,1; they all turn the screen background to white. For the sake of clarity in your programs it is advisable to use the base address of the chip. Sound Interface Device (SID) Registers Memory locations 54272-54300 ($D400-$D41C) are used to address the 6581 Sound Interface Device (SID). SID is a custom music synthesizer and sound effects generator chip that gives the 64 its impressive musical capabilities. It provides three separate music channels, or voices, as they are called. Each voice has 16-bit frequency resolution, waveform control, envelope shaping, oscillator synchronization, and ring modulation. In adc^tion, programmable high-pass, low-pass, and band-pass filters can be set and enabled or disabled for each sound channel. Since quite a few of these locations must be used in concert to produce sound, a brief summary of the interplay between some of these registers may be helpful. Often the first step is to select an overall volume level using the 158 54272-54273 ; \ Volume Register. Then, the desired frequency or pitch of the note is chosen by writing to each of the two bytes which make up the 16-bit Frequency Register. An ADSR envelope setting must be chosen by writing values to the Attack/Decay and Sustain/Release Registers. These determine the rate of the rise and fall of the volume of the note from zero volume to peak volume and back again. These rates have a great influ( J ence on the character of the sound. Finally, the waveform must be selected, and the note started (or the oscillator gated, as we say). This is done by writing certain bits to the Control Register. The waveform control lets you select one of four different waveforms, each of which has varying harmonic content that affects the tone quality of the sound. By writing a 1 to the gate bit, you start the Attack/Decay/Sustain cycle. After rising to a peak and declining to the Sustain volume, the volume will continue at the same level until you write a 0 to the gate bit. Then, the Release cycle will start. Make sure that you keep the same waveform bit set to 1 while you write the 0 to the gate bit, so that the Release cycle starts. Otherwise, the sound v«ll stop entirely, as it also will if the Volume Register or the Frequency Register is set to 0. It should be noted that except for the last four SID chip registers, these addresses are write-only. That means that their values cannot be determined by PEEKing these locations. Location Range: 54272-54273 ($D400$D401) Voice 1 Frequency Control Together, these two locations control the frequency or pitch of the musical output of voice 1. Some frequency must be selected in order for voice 1 to be heard. This frequency may be changed in the middle of a note to achieve special effects. The 16-bit range of the Frequency Control Register covers over eight full octaves, and allows / \ you to vary the pitch from 0 (very low) to about 4000 Hz (very high), in 65536 steps. The exact frequency of the output can be determined by the equation n FREQUENCY = (REGISTER VALUE*CLOCK/16777216)Hz where CLOCK equals the system clock frequency, 1022730 for American (NTSC) systems, 985250 for European (PAL), and j \ REGISTER VALUE is the combined value of these frequency registers. That combined value equals the value of the low byte plus 256 times the value of the high byte. Using the American (NTSC) j*^ clock value, the euqation works out to ^ FREQUENCY = REGISTER VALUE*.060959458 Hz 159 54272 54272 $D400 FRELOl Voice 1 Frequency Control (low byte) 54273 $D401 FREHIl Voice 1 Frequency Control (high byte) Location Range: 54274-54275($D402$D403) Voice 1 Pulse Waveform Width Control As you will see below under the description of the Control Register at 54276 ($D404), you can select one of four different waveforms for the output of each voice. If the pulse waveform is selected, these registers must be set to establish the pulse width. The pulse width has a 12-bit resolution, being made up of the value in the first register and the value in the lower nybble of the second register. The pulse width determines the duty cycle, or proportion of time that the rectangular wave will stay at the high part of the cycle. The following formula shows the relationship between the value in the Pulse Width Register and the proportion of time that the wave stays at the high part of the cycle: PULSE WIDTH = (REGISTER VALUE/40.95)% The possible range of register values (0-4095) covers the range of duty cycles from 0 to 100 percent in 4096 steps. Changing the pulse width will vastly change the sotmd created with the pulse waveform. 54274 $D402 PWLOl Voice 1 Pulse Waveform Width (low byte) 54275 $D403 PWHIl Voice 1 Pulse Waveform Width (high nybble) 54276 $D404 VCREGl Voice 1 Control Register Bit 0: Gate Bit: 1= Start attack/decay/sustain, 0= Start release Bit 1: Sync Bit: 1= Synchronize Oscillator with Oscillator 3 frequency Bit 2: Ring Modulation: 1 =Ring modulate Oscillators 1 and 3 Bit 3: Test Bit: l=DisabIe Oscillator 1 Bit 4: Select triangle waveform Bit 5: Select sawtooth waveform Bit 6: Select pulse waveform Bit 7: Select random noise waveform 160 54276 Bit 0. Bit 0 is used to gate the sound. Setting this bit to a 1 while selecting one of the four waveforms will start the attack/ decay/sustain part of the cycle. Setting this bit back to a 0 (while keeping the same waveform setting) anytime after a note has started playing will begin the release cycle of the note. Of course, in order for the gate bit to have an effect, the frequency and attack/decay/ sustain/release (ADSR) registers must be set, as well as the pulse width, if necessary, and the volume control set to a nonzero value. Bit 1. This bit is used to S5nichronize the fundamental frequency of Oscillator 1 with the fundamental frequency of Oscillator 3, allowing you to create a wide range of complex harmonic structures from voice 1. Synchronization occurs when this bit is set to 1. Oscillator 3 must be set to some frequency other than zero, but no other voice 3 parameters will affect the output from voice 1. Bit 2. When Bit 2 is set to 1, the triangle waveform output of voice 1 is replaced with a ring modulated combination of Oscillators 1 and 3. This ring inodulation produces nonharmonic overtone structures that are useful for creating bell or gong effects. Bit 3. Bit 3 is the test bit. When set to 1, it disables the output of the oscillator. This can be useful in generating very complex waveforms (even speech synthesis) under software control. Bit 4. When set to 1, Bit 4 selects the triangle waveform output of Oscillator 1. Bit 0 must also be set for the note to be sounded. Bit 5. This bit selects the sawtooth waveform when set to 1. Bit 0 must also be set for the sound to begin. Bit 6. Bit 6 chooses the pulse waveform when set to 1. The harmonic content of sound produced using this waveform may be varied using the Pulse Width Registers. Bit 0 must be set to begin the sound. Bit 7. When Bit 7 is set to 1, the noise output waveform for Oscillator 1 is set. This creates a random sound output whose waveform varies with a frequency proportionate to that of Oscillator 1. It can be used to imitate the sound of explosions, drums, and other unpitched noises. One of the four waveforms must be chosen in order to create a sound. Setting more than one of these bits will result in a logical ANDing of the waveforms. Particularly, the combination of tihe noise waveform and another is not recommended. Location Range: 54277-54278 ($D405$D406) Voice 1 Envelope (ADSR) Control When a note is played on a musical instrument, the volume does not suddenly rise to a peak and then cut off to zero. Rather, the volume builds to a peak, levels off to an intermediate value, and then fades 161 54277 away. This creates what is known as a volume envelope. The first phase of the envelope, in which the volume builds to a peak, is known as the attack phase. The second, in which it declines to an intermediate level, is called the decay phase. The third, in which the intermediate level of volume is held, is known as the sustain period. The final interval, in which the sound fades away, is called the release part of the cycle. The SID chip allows the volume envelope of each voice to be controlled, so that specific instruments may be imitated, or new sounds created. This is done via the attack/decay and sustain/release registers. Each register devotes four bits (which can store a number from 0 to 15) to each phase of the cycle. When a note is gated by writing a 1 to a waveform bit and to Bit 0 of the Control Register, the attack cycle begins. The volume of the sound builds to a peak over the period of time specified by the high nybble of the attack/decay register. Once it has reached the peak volume, it falls to the intermediate level during the period indicated by the low nybble of the attack/decay register (this is the decay phase). The volume of this intermediate or sustain level is selected by placing a value in the high nybble of the sustain/release register. This volume level is held until a 0 is written to the gate bit of the control register (while leaving the waveform bit set). \A^en that happens, the release phase begins, and the volume of the sound begins to taper off during the period indicated by the low nybble of the sustain/release register. You may notice the volume of the sound does not quite get to 0 at the end of the release cycle, and you may need to turn off the sound to get rid of the residual noise. You can do this either by setting the waveform bit back to 0, changing the frequency to 0, or setting the volume to 0. 54277 $D405 ATDCYl Voice 1 Attack/Decay Register Bits 0-3: Select decay cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select attack cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7 control the duration of the attack cycle. This is the period of time over which the volume will rise from 0 to its peak amplitude. There are 16 durations which may be selected. The way in which the number placed here corresponds to the elapsed time of this cycle is as follows: 0=2 milliseconds 1=8 milliseconds 2 = 16 milliseconds 3=24 milliseconds 4=38 milliseconds 162 54278 5=56 milliseconds 6 = 68 milliseconds 7=80 milliseconds 8 = 100 milliseconds 9=250 milliseconds 10=500 milliseconds 11=800 milliseconds 12 = 1 second 13=3 seconds 14=5 seconds 15=8 seconds Bits 0-3 control the length of the decay phase, in which the volume of the note declines from the peak reached in the attack phase to the sustain level. The number selected corresponds to the length of this phase as shown below: 0=6 milliseconds 1=24 milliseconds 2=48 milliseconds 3 = 72 milliseconds 4=114 milliseconds 5 = 168 milliseconds 6=204 milliseconds 7=240 milliseconds 8 = 300 milliseconds 9 = 750 milliseconds 10=1.5 seconds 11=2.4 seconds 12=3 seconds 13=9 seconds 14 = 15 seconds 15=24 seconds Since the two functions share one register, you must multiply the attack value by 16 and add it to the decay value in order to come up with the number to be placed in the register: REGISTER VALUE =(ATTACK*16)+DECAY 54278 $D406 SURELl Voice 1 Sustain/Release Control Register Bits 0-3: Select release cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select sustain volume level (0-15) Bits 4-7 select the volume level at which the note is sustained. Following the decay cycle, the volume of the output of voice 1 will remain at the selected sustain level as long as the gate bit of the Control Register is set to 1. The sustain values range from 0, which 163 54279 chooses no volume, to 15, which sets the output of voice 1 equal to the peak volume achieved during the attack cycle. Bits 0-3 determine the length of the release cycle. This phase, in which the volume fades from the sustain level to near zero volume, begins when the gate bit of the Control Register is set to 0 (while leaving the waveform setting that was previously chosen). The duration of this decline in volume corresponds to the number (0-15) selected in the same way as for the decay value: 0=6 milliseconds 1=24 milliseconds 2=48 milliseconds 3=72 milliseconds 4 = 114 milliseconds 5 = 168 milliseconds 6=204 milliseconds 7=240 milliseconds 8=300 milliseconds 9 = 750 milliseconds 10 = 1.5 seconds 11=2.4 seconds 12=3 seconds 13=9 seconds 14 = 15 seconds 15=24 seconds Location Range: 54279-54292 ($D407$D414) Voice 2 and Voice 3 Controls The various control registers for these two voices correspond almost exactly to those of voice 1. The one exception is that the sync and ring-modulafion bits of voice 2 operate on Oscillators 1 and 2, while the same bits of the Control Register for voice 3 use Oscillators 2 and 3. 54279 $D407 Voice 2 Frequency Control (low byte) FREL02 54280 $D408 FREHI2 PWL02 54282 $D40A Voice 2 Pulse Waveform Width (high nybble) PWHI2 164 54290 54283 $D40B VCREG2 Voice 2 Control Register Bit 0: Gate Bit: l=Start attack/decay /sustain, 0=Start release Bit 1: Sync Bit: 1= Synchronize oscillator with Oscillator 1 frequency Bit 2: Ring Modulation: l=Ring modulate Oscillators 2 and 1 Bit 3: Test Bit: 1 = Disable Oscillator 2 Bit 4: Select triangle waveform Bit 5: Select sawtooth waveform Bit 6: Select pulse waveform Bit 7: Select noise waveform 54284 $D40C Voice 2 Attack/Decay Register Bits 0-3: Select decay cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select attack cycle duration (0-15) 54285 $D40D Voice 2 Sustain/Release Control Register Bits 0-3: Select release cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select sustain volume level (0-15) 54286 $D40E Voice 3 Frequency Control (low byte) 54287 $D40F Voice 3 Frequency Control (high byte) 54288 $D410 Voice 3 Pulse Waveform Width (low byte) 54289 $D411 Voice 3 Pulse Waveform Width (high nybble) 54290 $D412 VCREG3 Voice 3 Control Register Bit 0: Gate Bit: 1= Start attack/decay/sustain, 0= Start release Bit 1: Sync Bit: 1= Synchronize oscillator with Oscillator 2 frequency Bit 2: Ring modulation: l=Ring modulate Oscillators 3 and 2 Bit 3: Test Bit: 1= Disable Oscillator 3 Bit 4: Select triangle waveform Bit 5: Select sawtooth waveform Bit 6: Select pulse waveform Bit 7: Select noise waveform ATDCY2 SUREL2 FREL03 FREHI3 PWL03 PWHI3 165 54291 54291 $D413 Voice 3 Attack/Decay Register Bits 0-3: Select decay cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select attack cycle duration (0-15) 54292 $D414 Voice 3 Sustain/Release Control Register Bits 0-3: Select release cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select sustain volume level (0-15) Location Range: 54293-54296 ($D415$D418) Filter Controls In addition to the controls detailed above for each voice, the SID chip also provides a filtering capability M^hich allows you to attenuate (make quieter) certain ranges of frequencies. Any one or all three voices can be filtered, and there is even a provision for filtering an external signal that is input through pin 5 of the monitor jack. A low-pass filter is available, which suppresses the volume of those frequency components that are above a designated cutoff level. The high-pass filter reduces the volume of frequency components that are below a certain level. The band-pass filter reduces the volume of frequency components on both sides of the chosen frequency, thereby enhancing that frequency. Finally, the high-pass and low-pass filters can be combined to form a notch reject filter, which reduces the volume of the frequency components nearest the selected frequency. These various filters can dramatically change the quality of the sound produced. The first two registers are used to select the filter cutoff frequency. This is the frequency above or below which any sounds will be made quieter. The further away from this level any frequency components are, the more their output volume will be suppressed (highand low-pass filters reduce the volume of those components by 12 dB per octave away from the center frequency, while the band-pass filter attenuates them by 6 dB per octave). The cutoff frequency has an 11 -bit range (which corresponds to numbers from 0 to 2047). This is made up of a high byte and three low bits. Therefore, to compute the frequency represented by the value in these registers, you must multiply the value in the high byte by 8, and add the value of the low three bits. The range of cutoff frequencies represented by these 2048 values stretches from 30 Hz to about 12,000 Hz. The exact frequency may be calculated with the formula: FREQUENCY = (REGISTER VALUE*5.8)+30Hz ATDCYS SUREL3 166 54296 An additional element in filtering is the resonance control. This allows you to peak the volume of the frequency elements nearest the cutoff frequency. 54293 $D415 CUTLO Bits 0-2: Low portion of filter cutoff frequency Bits 5-7: Unused 54294 $D416 CUTHI Filter Cutoff Frequency (high byte) 54295 $D417 RESON Filter Resonance Control Register Bit 0: Filter the output of voice 1? l=yes Bit 1: Filter the output of voice 2? l=yes Bit 2: Filter the output of voice 3? l=yes Bit 3: Filter the output from the external input? l=yes Bits 4-7: Select filter resonance 0-15 Bits 0-3 are used to control which of the voices will be altered by the filters. If one of these bits is set to 1, the corresponding voice will be processed through the filter, and its harmonic content will be changed accordingly. If the bit is set to 0, the voice will pass directly to the audio output. Note that there is also a provision for processing an external audio signal which is brought in through pin 5 of the Audio/ Video P6rt. Bits 4-7 control the resonance of the filter. By placing a number from 0 to 15 in these four bits, you may peak the volume of those frequencies nearest the cutoff. This creates an even sharper filtering effect. A setting of 0 causes no resonance, while a setting of 15 gives maximum resonance. 54296 $D418 SIGVOL r""^ Volume and Filter Select Register Bits 0-3: Select output volume (0-15) Bit 4: Select low-pass filter, l=low-pass on f— I Bit 5: Select band-pass filter, 1= band-pass on ' - - Bit 6: Select high-pass filter, l=high-pass on Bit 7: Disconnect output of voice 3, 1= voice 3 off Bits 0-3 control the volume of all outputs. The possible volume levels range from 0 (no volume) to 15 (maximum volume). Some level of volume must be set here before any sound can be heard. Bits 4-6 control the selection of the low-pass, band-pass, or high-pass filter. A 1 in any of these bits turns the corresponding filter on. These filters can be combined, although only one cutoff 167 54296 frequency can be chosen. In order for the filter to have any effect, at least one of the voices must be routed through it using the Filter Resonance Control Register at 54295 ($D417). When Bit 7 is set to 1, it disconnects the output of voice 3. This allows you to use the output of the oscillator for modulating the frequency of the other voices, or for generating random numbers, without any undesired audio output. Location Range: 54297-54298 ($D419$D41A) Game Paddle Inputs These registers allow you to read the game paddles that plug into joystick Controller Ports 1 and 2. Each paddle uses a variable resistor (also known as a potentiometer or pot), whose resistance is controlled by turning a knob. The varying resistance is used to vary the voltage to two pins of the SID chip between 0 and -1-5 volts. Andogto-digital (A/D) converters in the chip interpret these voltage levels as binary values and store the values in these registers. These registers return a number from 0 (minimum resistance) to 255 (maximum resistance) for each paddle in either of the ports, depending on the position of the paddle knob. Since these registers will read the paddle values for only one controller port, there is a switching mechanism which allows you to select which of the two ports to read. By writing a bit-pair of 01 (bit value of 64) to the last two bits of CIA #1 Data Port A (56320, $DCOO), you select the paddles on joystick Controller Port 1. By writing a bit-pair of 10 (bit value of 128), you select the paddles on Controller Port 2. If you look at the description of Data Port A (56320, $DCOO), however, you will notice that it is also used in the keyboard scanning process. By writing to this port, you determine which keyboard column will be read. Since the IRQ interrupt keyboard scan routine and the routine that checks for the STOP key are putting values into this location 60 times per second, you cannot reliably select the pair of paddles you wish to read from BASIC without first turning off the keyboard IRQ. This can be done with a POKE 56333,127. You can then read the paddles with the statements A=PEEK(54297) and B=PEEK(54298). The IRQ can be restored after the paddle read with a POKE 56333,129. It may, however, be easier and more accurate in the long run to use a machine language paddle read subroutine such as that presented on page 347 of the Commodore 64 Programmer's Reference Guide. The paddle fire buttons are read as Bits 2 and 3 of the Data Ports A (56320, $DC00) and B (56321, $DC01). On Port A, if Bit 2 is set to 0, button 1 is pushed, and if Bit 3 is set to 0, button 2 is 168 54299 pushed. On Port B, if Bit 2 is set to 0, button 3 is pushed, and if Bit 3 is set to 0, button 4 is pushed. The BASIC statements to test these buttons, therefore, are: PB(l)=(PEEK(56321)AND4)/4 PB(2)=(PEEK(56321)AND8)/8 PB(3) = (PEEK(56320)AND4)/4 PB(4) = (PEEK(56320)AND8)/8 If a 0 is returned by the PEEK statement, the button is pushed, and if a 1 is returned, it is not. 54297 $D419 POTX Read Game Paddle 1 (or 3) Position 54298 $D41A POTY Read Game Paddle 2 (or 4) Position 54299 $D41B RANDOM Read Oscillator 3/Random Number Generator This register lets you read the upper eight bits of the waveform output of Oscillator 3. The kinds of numbers generated by this output depend on the type of waveform selected. If the sawtooth waveform is chosen, the output read by this register will be a series of numbers which start at 0 and increase by 1 to a maximum of 255, at which time they start over at 0. When the triangle waveform is chosen, they increase from 0 to 255, at which time they decrease to 0 again. The rate at which these numbers change is determined by the frequency of Oscillator 3. If the pulse waveform is selected, the output here will be either 255 or 0. Finally, selecting the noise waveform will produce a random series of numbers between 0 and 255. This allows you to use the register as a random number generator for games. There are many other uses for reading Oscillator 3, however, particularly for modulation of the other voices through machine language software. For example, the output of this register could be added to the frequency of another voice. If the triangle waveform were selected for this purpose, it would cause the frequency of the other voice to rise and fall, at the frequency of Oscillator 3 (perhaps for vibrato effects). This output can also be combined with ttie Filter Frequency or Pulse Width Registers to vary the values in these registers quickly over a short period of time. Normally, when using Oscillator 3 for modulation, the audio output of voice 3 should be turned off by setting Bit 7 of the Volume and Filter Select Register at 54296 ($D418) to 1. It is not necessary to gate Bit 0 of Contrd Register 3 to use the oscillator, however, as its output is not affected by the ADSR envelope cycle. 169 54300 54300 $D41C ENV3 Envelope Generator 3 Output This register allows you to read the output of the voice 3 Envelope generator, in much the same way that the preceding register lets you read the output of Oscillator 3. This output can also be added to another oscillator's Frequency Control Registers, Pulse Width Registers, or the Filter Frequency Register. In order to produce any output from this register, however, the gate bit in Control Register 3 must be set to 1. Just as in the production of sound, setting the gate bit to 1 starts the attack/decay/sustain cycle, and setting it back to 0 starts the release cycle. Location Range: 54301-54303 ($D41D$D41F) Not Connected The SID chip has been provided with enough addresses for 32 different registers, but as it has only 29, the remaining three addresses are not used. Reading them will always return a value of 255 ($FF), and writing to them will have no effect. Location Range: 54304-55295 ($D420$D7FF) SID Register Images Since the SID chip requires enough addressing lines for only 32 locations (the minimum possible for its 29 registers), none of the higher bits are decoded when addressing the IK area that has been assigned to it. The result is that every 32-byte area in this IK block is a mirror of every other. For the sake of clarity in your programs, it is advisable not to use these addresses at all. 55296-56319 ($D800-$DBFF) Color RAM The normal Commodore 64 text graphics system uses a screen RAM area to keep track of the character shapes that are to be displayed. But since each character can be displayed in any of 16 foreground colors, there must also be a parallel area which keeps track of the foreground color. This 1024-byte area is used for that purpose (actually, since there are only 1000 screen positions, only 1000 bytes actually affect screen color). These 1000 bytes each control the foreground color of one character, with the first byte controlling the foreground color of the character in the upper-left corner, and subsequent bytes controlling the characters to the right and below that character. Because only four bits are needed to represent the 16 colors available, only the low four bits of each Color RAM location are 170 55296-56319 connected (this is why they are sometimes referred to as Color RAM Nybbles). Writing to the high bits will not affect them, and these four bits will usually return a random value when read (a small number of 64s return a constant value). Therefore, in order to read Color RAM correctly, you must mask out the top bits by using the logical AND function. In BASIC, you can read the first byte of Color RAM with the statement CR=PEEK(55296)AND15. This will always return a color value between 0 and 15. These color values correspond to the following colors: 0 = BLACK 1 = WHITE 2 = RED 3 = CYAN (LIGHT BLUE-GREEN) 4 = PURPLE 5 - GREEN 6 = BLUE 7 = YELLOW 8 = ORANGE 9 = BROWN 10 = LIGHT RED 11 = DARK GRAY 12 = MEDIUM GRAY 13 = LIGHT GREEN 14 = LIGHT BLUE 15 = LIGHT GRAY Color mapping affords a convenient method of changing the color of the text display without changing the letters. By POKEing the appropriate section of Color RAM, you can change the color of a whole section of text on the screen without affecting the content of the text. You can even use this method to make letters disappear by changing their foreground colors to match the background color (or by changing the background to match the foreground), and later make them reappear by changing them back, or by changing the background to a contrasting color. An interesting example program which changes Color RAM quickly in BASIC can be found under the entry for 648 ($288). A change in the Operating System causes newer 64s to set all of the Color RAM locations to the same value as the current background color whenever the screen is cleared. Therefore, POKEing character codes to the Screen RAM area will not appear to have any effect, because the letters will be the same color as the background. This can easily be turned to your advantage, however, because it means that all you have to do to set all of Color RAM to a particular value is to set the background color to that value (using the register 171 55296-56319 at 53281, $D021), clear the screen, and return the background color to the desired value. The various graphics modes use this area differently than does the regular text mode. In high-resolution bitmap mode, this area is not used at all, but in multicolor bitmap mode it is used to determine the color of the 11 bit-pair for a given 8 dot by 8 dot area. In multicolor text mode, only the lowest three bits are used, so only colors 0-7 may be selected. The fourth bit is used to determine whether a character will be displayed in regular text or multicolor text. Characters with a color value over 7 are displayed as multicolor characters, with the color of the 11 bit-pair determined by the color value minus 8. Characters with a color value under 8 are displayed normally. It should be noted that unlike the Screen RAM area, which can be moved to any RAM location, the Color RAM area is fixed, and will function normally regardless of where screen memory is located. Complex Interface Adapter (CIA) #1 Registers Locations 56320-56335 ($DCOO-$DCOF) are used to communicate with the Complex Interface Adapter chip #1 (CIA #1). This chip is a successor to the earlier VIA and PIA devices used on the VIC-20 and PET. This chip functions the same way as the VIA and PIA: It allows the 6510 microprocessor to communicate with peripheral input and output devices. The specific devices that CIA #1 'reads data from and sends data to are the joystick controllers, the paddle fire buttons, and the keyboard. In addition to its two data ports, CIA #1 has two timers, each of which can count an interval from a millionth of a second to a fifteenth of a second. Or the timers can be hooked together to count much longer intervals. CIA #1 has an interrupt line which is connected to the 6510 IRQ line. These two timers can be used to generate interrupts at specified intervals (such as the 1 /60 second interrupt used for keyboard scanning, or the more complexly timed interrupts that drive the tape read and write routines). As you will see below, the CIA chip has a host of other features to aid in Input/Output functions. 172 56320-56321 Location Range: 56320-56321 ($DCOO$DC01) CIA #1 Data Ports A and B These registers are where the actual communication with outside devices takes place. Bits of data written to these registers can be sent to external devices, while bits of data tiiat those devices send can be read here. The keyboard is so necessary to the computer's operation that you may have a hard time thinking of it as a peripheral device. Nonetheless, it cannot be directly read by the 6510 microprocessor. Instead, the keys are connected in a matrix of eight rows by eight columns to CIA #1 Ports A and B. The layout of this matrix is shown below. READ PORT B (56321, $DC01) Bit 7 Bite Bits Bit 4 Bit 3 Bit 2 Bitl BitO STOP Q Q SPACE 2 CTRL 1 / t RIGHT SHIFT HOME • / * £ / @ • • • L P + N o K M 0 J I 9 V u H B 8 G Y 7 X T F C 6 D R 5 LEFT SHIFT E S Z 4 A W 3 CRSR DOWN f5 fS fl f7 CRSR RIGHT RETURN DELETE 173 56320-56321 As you can see, there are two keys which do not appear in the matrix. The SHIFT LOCK key is not read as a separate key, but rather is a mechanical device which holds the left SHIFT key switch in a closed position. The RESTORE key is not read like the other keys either. It is directly connected to the NMI interrupt line of the 6510 microprocessor, and causes an NMI interrupt to occur whenever it is pressed (not just when it is pressed with the STOP key). In order to read the individual keys in the matrix, you must first set Port A for all outputs (255, $FF), and Port B for all inputs (0), using the Data Direction Registers. Note that this is the default condition. Next, you must write a 0 in the bit of Data Port A that corresponds to the column that you wish to read, and a 1 to the bits that correspond to columns you wish to ignore. You will then be able to read Data Port B to see which keys in that column are being pushed. A 0 in any bit position signifies that the key in the corresponding row of the selected column is being pressed, while a 1 indicates that the key is not being pressed. A value of 255 ($FF) means that no keys in that column are being pressed. Fortunately for us all, an interrupt routine causes the keyboard to be read, and the results are made available to the Operating System automatically every 1 /60 second. And even when the normal interrupt routine cannot be used, you can use the Kemal SCNKEY routine at 65439 ($FF9F) to read the keyboard. These same data ports are also used to read the joystick controllers. Although common sense might lead you to believe that you could read tihe joystick that is plugged into the port marked Controller Port 1 from Data Port A, and the second joystick from Data Port B, there is nothing common about the Commodore 64. Controller Port 1 is read from Data Port B, and Controller Port 2 is read from CIA #1 Data Port A. Joysticks consist of five switches, one each for the up, down, right, and left directions, and another for the fire button. The switches are read like the key switches— if the switch is pressed, the corresponding bit will read 0, and if it is not pressed, the bit will be set to 1. From BASIC, you can PEEK the ports and use the AND and NOT operators to mask the unused bits and invert the logic for easier comprehension. For example, to read the joystick in Controller Port 1, you could use the statement: S1=N0T PEEK(56321)AND15 The meaning of the possible numbers returned are: O=none pressed l=up 2= down 4=left 5= up left 6= down left 174 56320-56321 8= right 9= up right 10=down right The same technique can be used for joystick 2, by substituting 56320 as the number to PEEK. By the way, the 3 and 7 aren't listed because they represent impossible combinations like up-down. To read the fire buttons, you can PEEK the appropriate port and use the AND operator to mask all but Bit 4: Tl =(PEEK(56321)AND16)/16 The above will return a 0 if the button is pressed, and a 1 if it is not. Substitute location 56320 as the location to PEEK for Trigger Button 2. Since CIA #1 Data Port B is used for reading the keyboard as well as joystick 1, some confusion can result. The routine that checks the keyboard has no way of telling whether a particular bit was set to 0 by a keypress or one of the joystick switches. For example, if you plug the joystick into Controller Port 1 and push the stick to the right, the routine will interpret this as the 2 key being pressed, because both set the same bit to 0. Likewise, when you read the joystick, it will register as being pushed to the right if the 2 key is being pressed. The problem of mistaking the keyboard for the joystick can be solved by turning off the keyscan momentarily when reading the stick with a POKE 56333,127:POKE 56320,255, and restoring it after the read with a POKE 56333,129. Sometimes you can use the simpler solution of clearing the keyboard buffer after reading the joystick, with a POKE 198,0. The problem of mistaking the joystick for a keypress is much more difficult — there is no real way to turn off the joystick. Many commercially available games just use Controller Port 2 to avoid the conflict. So, if you can't beat them, sit back and press your joystick to the left in order to slow down a program listing (the keyscan routine thinks that it is the CTRL key). As if all of the above were not enough. Port A is also used to control which set of paddles is read by the SID chip, and to read the paddle fire buttons. Since there are two paddles per joystick Controller Port, and only two SID registers for reading paddle positions, there has to be a method for switching the paddle read from joystick Port 1 to joystick Port 2. When Bit 7 of Port A is set to 1 and Bit 6 is cleared to 0, the SID registers read the paddles on Port 1. When Bit 7 is set to 0 and Bit 6 is set to 1, the paddles on Port 2 are read by the SID chip registers. Note that this also conflicts with the keyscan routine, which is constantly writing different values to CIA #1 Data Port A in order to select the keyboard column to read (most of the time, the value for the last column is written to this port, which coincides with the 175 56320 selection of paddles on joystick Port 1). Therefore, in order to get an accurate reading, you must turn off the keyscan IRQ and select which joystick port you want to read. See POTX at 54297 ($D419), which is the SID register where the paddles are read, for the exact technique. Although the SID chip is used to read the paddle settings, the fire buttons are read at CIA #1 Data Ports A and B. The fire buttons for the paddles plugged into Controller Port 1 are read at Data Port B (56321, $DC01), while those for the paddles plugged into Controller Port 2 are read from Data Port A (56320, $DCOO). The fire buttons are read at Bit 2 and Bit 3 of each port (the same as the joystick left and joystick right switches), and as usual, the bit will read 0 if the corresponding button is pushed, and 1 if it is not. Although only two of the four paddle values can be read at any one time, you can always read all four paddle buttons. See the game paddle input description at 54297 ($D419) for the BASIC statements used to read these buttons. Finally, Data Port B can also be used as an output by either Timer A or B. It is possible to set a mode in which the timers do not cause an interrupt when they run down (see the descriptions of Control Registers A and B at 56334-5 $DCOE-F). Instead, they cause the output on Bit 6 or 7 of Data Port B to change. Timer A can be set either to pulse the output of Bit 6 for one machine cycle, or to toggle that bit from 1 to 0 or 0 to 1. Timer B can use Bit 7 of this register for the same purpose. 56320 $DCOO CIAPRA Data Port Register A Bit 0: Select to read keyboard column 0 Read joystick 2 up direction Bit 1: Select to read keyboard column 1 Read joystick 2 down direction Bit 2: Select to read keyboard column 2 Read joystick 2 left direction Read paddle 1 fire button Bit 3: Select to read keyboard column 3 Read joystick 2 right direction Read paddle 2 fire button Bit 4: Select to read keyboard column 4 Read joystick 2 fire button Bit 5: Select to read keyboard column 5 Bit 6: Select to read keyboard column 6 Select to read paddles on Port A or B Bit 7: Select to read keyboard column 7 Select to read paddles on Port A or B 176 56322 56321 $DC01 CIAPRB Data Port Register B Bit 0: Read keyboard row 0 Read joystick 1 up direction Bit 1: Read keyboard row 1 Read joystick 1 down direction Bit 2: Read keyboard row 2 Read joystick 1 left direction Read paddle 1 fire button Bit 3: Read keyboard row 3 Read joystick 1 right direction Read paddle 2 fire button Bit 4: Read keyboard row 4 Read joystick 1 fire button Bit 5: Read keyboard row 5 Bit 6: Read keyboard row 6 Toggle or pulse data output for Timer A Bit 7: Select to read keyboard column 7 Toggle or pulse data output for Timer B Location Range: 56322-56323 ($DC02$DC03) CIA #1 Data Direction Registers A and B These Data Direction Registers control the direction of data flow over Data Ports A and B. Each bit controls the direction of the data on the corresponding bit of the port. If the bit of the Direction Register is set to a 1, the corresponding Data Port bit will be used for data output. If the bit is set to a 0, the corresponding Data Port bit will be used for data input. For example. Bit 7 of Data Direction Register A controls Bit 7 of Data Port A, and if that direction bit is set to 0, Bit 7 of Data Port A will be used for data input. If the direction bit is set to 1, however, data Bit 7 on Port A will be used for data output. The default setting for Data Direction Register A is 255 (all outputs), and for Data Direction Register B it is 0 (all inputs). This corresponds to the setting used when reading the keyboard (the keyboard column number is written to Data Port A, and the row number is then read in Data Port B). 56322 $DC02 CIDDRA Data Direction Register A Bit 0: Select Bit 0 of Data Port A for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 1: Select Bit 1 of Data Port A for input or output (0= input, 1= output) 177 56323 Bit 2: Select Bit 2 of Data Port A for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 3: Select Bit 3 of Data Port A for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 4: Select Bit 4 of Data Port A for input or output (0=input, 1= output) Bit 5: Select Bit 5 of Data Port A for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 6: Select Bit 6 of Data Port A for input or output (0=input, 1= output) Bit 7: Select Bit 7 of Data Port A for input or output (0= input, 1= output) 56323 $DC03 CIDDRB Data Direction Register B Bit 0: Select Bit 0 of Data Port B for input or output (0 = input. 1= output) Bit 1: Select Bit 1 of Data Port B for input or output (0 = input. 1= output) Bit 2: Select Bit 2 of Data Port B for input or output (0 = input. 1= output) Bit 3: Select Bit 3 of Data Port B for input or output (0 = input. 1 = output) Bit 4: Select Bit 4 of Data Port B for input or output (0 = input. 1= output) Bit 5: Select Bit 5 of Data Port B for input or output (0 = input. 1= output) Bit 6: Select Bit 6 of Data Port B for input or output (0 = input. 1= output) Bit 7: Select Bit 7 of Data Port B for input or output (0 = input. 1= output) Location Range: 56324-56327 ($DC04$DC07) Timers A and B Low and High Bytes These four timer registers (two for each timer) have different functions depending on whether you are reading from them or writing to them. When you read from these registers, you get the present value of the Timer Counter (which counts down from its initial value to 0). When you write data to these registers, it is stored in the Timer Latch, and from there it can be used to load the Timer Counter using the Force Load bit of Control Register A or B (see 56334-5, $DCOE-F below). These interval timers can hold a 16-bit number from 0 to 65535, in normal 6510 low-byte, high-byte format (VALUE=LOW BYTE-f 256*HIGH BYTE). Once the Timer Counter is set to an initial 178 I 1 n 56324-56327 value, and the timer is started, the timer will count down one number every microprocessor clock cycle. Since the clock speed of the 64 (using the American NTSC television standard) is 1,022,730 cycles p-, per second, every count takes approximately a millionth of a second. ' \ The formula for calculating the amount of time it will take for the timer to count down from its latch value to 0 is: TIME = LATCH VALUE /CLOCK SPEED where LATCH VALUE is the value written to the low and high timer registers (LATCH VALUE = TIMER LOW+256*TIMER HIGH), and CLOCK SPEED is 1,022,730 cycles per second for American (NTSC) standard television monitors, or 985,250 for European (PAL) monitors. When Timer Counter A or B gets to 0, it will set Bit 0 or 1 in the Interrupt Control Register at 56333 ($DCOD). If the timer interrupt has been enabled (see 56333, $DCOD), an IRQ will take place, and the high bit of the Interrupt Control Register will be set to 1. Alternately, if the Port B output bit is set, the timer will write data to Bit 6 or 7 of Port B. After the timer gets to 0, it will reload the Timer Latch Value, and either stop or count down again, depending on whether it is in one-shot or continuous mode (determined by Bit 3 of the Control Register). Although usually a timer will be used to count the microprocesspr clock cycles. Timer A can count either the microprocessor clock cycles or external pulses on the CTN line, which is connected to pin 4 of the User Port. Timer B is even more versatile. In addition to these two sources. Timer B can count the number of times that Timer A goes to 0. By setting Timer A to count the microprocessor clock, and setting Timer B to count the number of times that Timer A zeros, you effectively link the two timers into one 32-bit timer that can count up to 70 minutes with accuracy within 1/15 second. In the 64, CIA #1 Timer A is used to generate the interrupt (— , which drives the routine for reading the keyboard and updating the I \ software clock. Both Timers A and B are also used for the timing of the routines that read and write tape data. Normally, Timer A is set for continuous operation, and latched with a value of 149 in the low byte and 66 in the high byte, for a total Latch Value of 17045. This means that it is set to count to 0 every 17045/1022730 seconds, or approximately 1/60 second. For tape reads and writes, the tape routines take over the IRQ vectors. Even though the tape vrate routines use the on-chip I/O port at location 1 for the actual data output to the cassette, reading and writing to the cassette uses both CIA #1 Timer A and Timer B for timing the I/O routines. 179 n

---
