# Memory Page 212

nome: FRELO
descrizione: l Voice 1 Frequency Control (low byte) 54273 $D401 FREHIl Voice 1 Frequency Control (high byte) Location Range: 54274-54275($D402$D403) Voice 1 Pulse Waveform Width Control As you will see below under the description of the Control Register at 54276 ($D404), you can select one of four different waveforms for the output of each voice. If the pulse waveform is selected, these registers must be set to establish the pulse width. The pulse width has a 12-bit resolution, being made up of the value in the first register and the value in the lower nybble of the second register. The pulse width determines the duty cycle, or proportion of time that the rectangular wave will stay at the high part of the cycle. The following formula shows the relationship between the value in the Pulse Width Register and the proportion of time that the wave stays at the high part of the cycle: PULSE WIDTH = (REGISTER VALUE/40.95)% The possible range of register values (0-4095) covers the range of duty cycles from 0 to 100 percent in 4096 steps. Changing the pulse width will vastly change the sotmd created with the pulse waveform. 54274 $D402 PWLOl Voice 1 Pulse Waveform Width (low byte) 54275 $D403 PWHIl Voice 1 Pulse Waveform Width (high nybble) 54276 $D404 VCREGl Voice 1 Control Register Bit 0: Gate Bit: 1= Start attack/decay/sustain, 0= Start release Bit 1: Sync Bit: 1= Synchronize Oscillator with Oscillator 3 frequency Bit 2: Ring Modulation: 1 =Ring modulate Oscillators 1 and 3 Bit 3: Test Bit: l=DisabIe Oscillator 1 Bit 4: Select triangle waveform Bit 5: Select sawtooth waveform Bit 6: Select pulse waveform Bit 7: Select random noise waveform 160
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 54272
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D400
man: Page 174 54276 Bit 0. Bit 0 is used to gate the sound. Setting this bit to a 1 while selecting one of the four waveforms will start the attack/ decay/sustain part of the cycle. Setting this bit back to a 0 (while keeping the same waveform setting) anytime after a note has started playing will begin the release cycle of the note. Of course, in order for the gate bit to have an effect, the frequency and attack/decay/ sustain/release (ADSR) registers must be set, as well as the pulse width, if necessary, and the volume control set to a nonzero value. Bit 1. This bit is used to S5nichronize the fundamental frequency of Oscillator 1 with the fundamental frequency of Oscillator 3, allowing you to create a wide range of complex harmonic structures from voice 1. Synchronization occurs when this bit is set to 1. Oscillator 3 must be set to some frequency other than zero, but no other voice 3 parameters will affect the output from voice 1. Bit 2. When Bit 2 is set to 1, the triangle waveform output of voice 1 is replaced with a ring modulated combination of Oscillators 1 and 3. This ring inodulation produces nonharmonic overtone structures that are useful for creating bell or gong effects. Bit 3. Bit 3 is the test bit. When set to 1, it disables the output of the oscillator. This can be useful in generating very complex waveforms (even speech synthesis) under software control. Bit 4. When set to 1, Bit 4 selects the triangle waveform output of Oscillator 1. Bit 0 must also be set for the note to be sounded. Bit 5. This bit selects the sawtooth waveform when set to 1. Bit 0 must also be set for the sound to begin. Bit 6. Bit 6 chooses the pulse waveform when set to 1. The harmonic content of sound produced using this waveform may be varied using the Pulse Width Registers. Bit 0 must be set to begin the sound. Bit 7. When Bit 7 is set to 1, the noise output waveform for Oscillator 1 is set. This creates a random sound output whose waveform varies with a frequency proportionate to that of Oscillator 1. It can be used to imitate the sound of explosions, drums, and other unpitched noises. One of the four waveforms must be chosen in order to create a sound. Setting more than one of these bits will result in a logical ANDing of the waveforms. Particularly, the combination of tihe noise waveform and another is not recommended. Location Range: 54277-54278 ($D405$D406) Voice 1 Envelope (ADSR) Control When a note is played on a musical instrument, the volume does not suddenly rise to a peak and then cut off to zero. Rather, the volume builds to a peak, levels off to an intermediate value, and then fades 161 Page 175

---

nome: ATDCY
descrizione: l Voice 1 Attack/Decay Register Bits 0-3: Select decay cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select attack cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7 control the duration of the attack cycle. This is the period of time over which the volume will rise from 0 to its peak amplitude. There are 16 durations which may be selected. The way in which the number placed here corresponds to the elapsed time of this cycle is as follows: 0=2 milliseconds 1=8 milliseconds 2 = 16 milliseconds 3=24 milliseconds 4=38 milliseconds 162
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 54277
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D405
man: Page 176

---

nome: SUREL
descrizione: l Voice 1 Sustain/Release Control Register Bits 0-3: Select release cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select sustain volume level (0-15) Bits 4-7 select the volume level at which the note is sustained. Following the decay cycle, the volume of the output of voice 1 will remain at the selected sustain level as long as the gate bit of the Control Register is set to 1. The sustain values range from 0, which 163
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 54278
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D406
man: Page 177

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Voice 2 Frequency Control (low byte) FREL02 54280 $D408 FREHI2 PWL02 54282 $D40A Voice 2 Pulse Waveform Width (high nybble) PWHI2 164
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 54279
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D407
man: Page 178

---

nome: VCREG2
descrizione: Voice 2 Control Register Bit 0: Gate Bit: l=Start attack/decay /sustain, 0=Start release Bit 1: Sync Bit: 1= Synchronize oscillator with Oscillator 1 frequency Bit 2: Ring Modulation: l=Ring modulate Oscillators 2 and 1 Bit 3: Test Bit: 1 = Disable Oscillator 2 Bit 4: Select triangle waveform Bit 5: Select sawtooth waveform Bit 6: Select pulse waveform Bit 7: Select noise waveform 54284 $D40C Voice 2 Attack/Decay Register Bits 0-3: Select decay cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select attack cycle duration (0-15) 54285 $D40D Voice 2 Sustain/Release Control Register Bits 0-3: Select release cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select sustain volume level (0-15) 54286 $D40E Voice 3 Frequency Control (low byte) 54287 $D40F Voice 3 Frequency Control (high byte) 54288 $D410 Voice 3 Pulse Waveform Width (low byte) 54289 $D411 Voice 3 Pulse Waveform Width (high nybble) 54290 $D412 VCREG3 Voice 3 Control Register Bit 0: Gate Bit: 1= Start attack/decay/sustain, 0= Start release Bit 1: Sync Bit: 1= Synchronize oscillator with Oscillator 2 frequency Bit 2: Ring modulation: l=Ring modulate Oscillators 3 and 2 Bit 3: Test Bit: 1= Disable Oscillator 3 Bit 4: Select triangle waveform Bit 5: Select sawtooth waveform Bit 6: Select pulse waveform Bit 7: Select noise waveform ATDCY2 SUREL2 FREL03 FREHI3 PWL03 PWHI3 165
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 54283
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D40B
man: Page 179

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Voice 3 Attack/Decay Register Bits 0-3: Select decay cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select attack cycle duration (0-15) 54292 $D414 Voice 3 Sustain/Release Control Register Bits 0-3: Select release cycle duration (0-15) Bits 4-7: Select sustain volume level (0-15) Location Range: 54293-54296 ($D415$D418) Filter Controls In addition to the controls detailed above for each voice, the SID chip also provides a filtering capability M^hich allows you to attenuate (make quieter) certain ranges of frequencies. Any one or all three voices can be filtered, and there is even a provision for filtering an external signal that is input through pin 5 of the monitor jack. A low-pass filter is available, which suppresses the volume of those frequency components that are above a designated cutoff level. The high-pass filter reduces the volume of frequency components that are below a certain level. The band-pass filter reduces the volume of frequency components on both sides of the chosen frequency, thereby enhancing that frequency. Finally, the high-pass and low-pass filters can be combined to form a notch reject filter, which reduces the volume of the frequency components nearest the selected frequency. These various filters can dramatically change the quality of the sound produced. The first two registers are used to select the filter cutoff frequency. This is the frequency above or below which any sounds will be made quieter. The further away from this level any frequency components are, the more their output volume will be suppressed (highand low-pass filters reduce the volume of those components by 12 dB per octave away from the center frequency, while the band-pass filter attenuates them by 6 dB per octave). The cutoff frequency has an 11 -bit range (which corresponds to numbers from 0 to 2047). This is made up of a high byte and three low bits. Therefore, to compute the frequency represented by the value in these registers, you must multiply the value in the high byte by 8, and add the value of the low three bits. The range of cutoff frequencies represented by these 2048 values stretches from 30 Hz to about 12,000 Hz. The exact frequency may be calculated with the formula: FREQUENCY = (REGISTER VALUE*5.8)+30Hz ATDCYS SUREL3 166
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 54291
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D413
man: Page 180

---

nome: CUTLO
descrizione: Bits 0-2: Low portion of filter cutoff frequency Bits 5-7: Unused 54294 $D416 CUTHI Filter Cutoff Frequency (high byte) 54295 $D417 RESON Filter Resonance Control Register Bit 0: Filter the output of voice 1? l=yes Bit 1: Filter the output of voice 2? l=yes Bit 2: Filter the output of voice 3? l=yes Bit 3: Filter the output from the external input? l=yes Bits 4-7: Select filter resonance 0-15 Bits 0-3 are used to control which of the voices will be altered by the filters. If one of these bits is set to 1, the corresponding voice will be processed through the filter, and its harmonic content will be changed accordingly. If the bit is set to 0, the voice will pass directly to the audio output. Note that there is also a provision for processing an external audio signal which is brought in through pin 5 of the Audio/ Video P6rt. Bits 4-7 control the resonance of the filter. By placing a number from 0 to 15 in these four bits, you may peak the volume of those frequencies nearest the cutoff. This creates an even sharper filtering effect. A setting of 0 causes no resonance, while a setting of 15 gives maximum resonance. 54296 $D418 SIGVOL r""^ Volume and Filter Select Register Bits 0-3: Select output volume (0-15) Bit 4: Select low-pass filter, l=low-pass on f— I Bit 5: Select band-pass filter, 1= band-pass on ' - - Bit 6: Select high-pass filter, l=high-pass on Bit 7: Disconnect output of voice 3, 1= voice 3 off Bits 0-3 control the volume of all outputs. The possible volume levels range from 0 (no volume) to 15 (maximum volume). Some level of volume must be set here before any sound can be heard. Bits 4-6 control the selection of the low-pass, band-pass, or high-pass filter. A 1 in any of these bits turns the corresponding filter on. These filters can be combined, although only one cutoff 167
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 54293
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D415
man: Page 181 54296 frequency can be chosen. In order for the filter to have any effect, at least one of the voices must be routed through it using the Filter Resonance Control Register at 54295 ($D417). When Bit 7 is set to 1, it disconnects the output of voice 3. This allows you to use the output of the oscillator for modulating the frequency of the other voices, or for generating random numbers, without any undesired audio output. Location Range: 54297-54298 ($D419$D41A) Game Paddle Inputs These registers allow you to read the game paddles that plug into joystick Controller Ports 1 and 2. Each paddle uses a variable resistor (also known as a potentiometer or pot), whose resistance is controlled by turning a knob. The varying resistance is used to vary the voltage to two pins of the SID chip between 0 and -1-5 volts. Andogto-digital (A/D) converters in the chip interpret these voltage levels as binary values and store the values in these registers. These registers return a number from 0 (minimum resistance) to 255 (maximum resistance) for each paddle in either of the ports, depending on the position of the paddle knob. Since these registers will read the paddle values for only one controller port, there is a switching mechanism which allows you to select which of the two ports to read. By writing a bit-pair of 01 (bit value of 64) to the last two bits of CIA #1 Data Port A (56320, $DCOO), you select the paddles on joystick Controller Port 1. By writing a bit-pair of 10 (bit value of 128), you select the paddles on Controller Port 2. If you look at the description of Data Port A (56320, $DCOO), however, you will notice that it is also used in the keyboard scanning process. By writing to this port, you determine which keyboard column will be read. Since the IRQ interrupt keyboard scan routine and the routine that checks for the STOP key are putting values into this location 60 times per second, you cannot reliably select the pair of paddles you wish to read from BASIC without first turning off the keyboard IRQ. This can be done with a POKE 56333,127. You can then read the paddles with the statements A=PEEK(54297) and B=PEEK(54298). The IRQ can be restored after the paddle read with a POKE 56333,129. It may, however, be easier and more accurate in the long run to use a machine language paddle read subroutine such as that presented on page 347 of the Commodore 64 Programmer's Reference Guide. The paddle fire buttons are read as Bits 2 and 3 of the Data Ports A (56320, $DC00) and B (56321, $DC01). On Port A, if Bit 2 is set to 0, button 1 is pushed, and if Bit 3 is set to 0, button 2 is 168 Page 182

---

nome: POTX
descrizione: Read Game Paddle 1 (or 3) Position 54298 $D41A POTY Read Game Paddle 2 (or 4) Position 54299 $D41B RANDOM Read Oscillator 3/Random Number Generator This register lets you read the upper eight bits of the waveform output of Oscillator 3. The kinds of numbers generated by this output depend on the type of waveform selected. If the sawtooth waveform is chosen, the output read by this register will be a series of numbers which start at 0 and increase by 1 to a maximum of 255, at which time they start over at 0. When the triangle waveform is chosen, they increase from 0 to 255, at which time they decrease to 0 again. The rate at which these numbers change is determined by the frequency of Oscillator 3. If the pulse waveform is selected, the output here will be either 255 or 0. Finally, selecting the noise waveform will produce a random series of numbers between 0 and 255. This allows you to use the register as a random number generator for games. There are many other uses for reading Oscillator 3, however, particularly for modulation of the other voices through machine language software. For example, the output of this register could be added to the frequency of another voice. If the triangle waveform were selected for this purpose, it would cause the frequency of the other voice to rise and fall, at the frequency of Oscillator 3 (perhaps for vibrato effects). This output can also be combined with ttie Filter Frequency or Pulse Width Registers to vary the values in these registers quickly over a short period of time. Normally, when using Oscillator 3 for modulation, the audio output of voice 3 should be turned off by setting Bit 7 of the Volume and Filter Select Register at 54296 ($D418) to 1. It is not necessary to gate Bit 0 of Contrd Register 3 to use the oscillator, however, as its output is not affected by the ADSR envelope cycle. 169
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 54297
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D419
man: Page 183

---

nome: ENV3
descrizione: Envelope Generator 3 Output This register allows you to read the output of the voice 3 Envelope generator, in much the same way that the preceding register lets you read the output of Oscillator 3. This output can also be added to another oscillator's Frequency Control Registers, Pulse Width Registers, or the Filter Frequency Register. In order to produce any output from this register, however, the gate bit in Control Register 3 must be set to 1. Just as in the production of sound, setting the gate bit to 1 starts the attack/decay/sustain cycle, and setting it back to 0 starts the release cycle. Location Range: 54301-54303 ($D41D$D41F) Not Connected The SID chip has been provided with enough addresses for 32 different registers, but as it has only 29, the remaining three addresses are not used. Reading them will always return a value of 255 ($FF), and writing to them will have no effect. Location Range: 54304-55295 ($D420$D7FF) SID Register Images Since the SID chip requires enough addressing lines for only 32 locations (the minimum possible for its 29 registers), none of the higher bits are decoded when addressing the IK area that has been assigned to it. The result is that every 32-byte area in this IK block is a mirror of every other. For the sake of clarity in your programs, it is advisable not to use these addresses at all. 55296-56319 ($D800-$DBFF) Color RAM The normal Commodore 64 text graphics system uses a screen RAM area to keep track of the character shapes that are to be displayed. But since each character can be displayed in any of 16 foreground colors, there must also be a parallel area which keeps track of the foreground color. This 1024-byte area is used for that purpose (actually, since there are only 1000 screen positions, only 1000 bytes actually affect screen color). These 1000 bytes each control the foreground color of one character, with the first byte controlling the foreground color of the character in the upper-left corner, and subsequent bytes controlling the characters to the right and below that character. Because only four bits are needed to represent the 16 colors available, only the low four bits of each Color RAM location are 170
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 54300
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $D41C
man: Page 184 55296-56319 connected (this is why they are sometimes referred to as Color RAM Nybbles). Writing to the high bits will not affect them, and these four bits will usually return a random value when read (a small number of 64s return a constant value). Therefore, in order to read Color RAM correctly, you must mask out the top bits by using the logical AND function. In BASIC, you can read the first byte of Color RAM with the statement CR=PEEK(55296)AND15. This will always return a color value between 0 and 15. These color values correspond to the following colors: 0 = BLACK 1 = WHITE 2 = RED 3 = CYAN (LIGHT BLUE-GREEN) 4 = PURPLE 5 - GREEN 6 = BLUE 7 = YELLOW 8 = ORANGE 9 = BROWN 10 = LIGHT RED 11 = DARK GRAY 12 = MEDIUM GRAY 13 = LIGHT GREEN 14 = LIGHT BLUE 15 = LIGHT GRAY Color mapping affords a convenient method of changing the color of the text display without changing the letters. By POKEing the appropriate section of Color RAM, you can change the color of a whole section of text on the screen without affecting the content of the text. You can even use this method to make letters disappear by changing their foreground colors to match the background color (or by changing the background to match the foreground), and later make them reappear by changing them back, or by changing the background to a contrasting color. An interesting example program which changes Color RAM quickly in BASIC can be found under the entry for 648 ($288). A change in the Operating System causes newer 64s to set all of the Color RAM locations to the same value as the current background color whenever the screen is cleared. Therefore, POKEing character codes to the Screen RAM area will not appear to have any effect, because the letters will be the same color as the background. This can easily be turned to your advantage, however, because it means that all you have to do to set all of Color RAM to a particular value is to set the background color to that value (using the register 171 Page 185 55296-56319 at 53281, $D021), clear the screen, and return the background color to the desired value. The various graphics modes use this area differently than does the regular text mode. In high-resolution bitmap mode, this area is not used at all, but in multicolor bitmap mode it is used to determine the color of the 11 bit-pair for a given 8 dot by 8 dot area. In multicolor text mode, only the lowest three bits are used, so only colors 0-7 may be selected. The fourth bit is used to determine whether a character will be displayed in regular text or multicolor text. Characters with a color value over 7 are displayed as multicolor characters, with the color of the 11 bit-pair determined by the color value minus 8. Characters with a color value under 8 are displayed normally. It should be noted that unlike the Screen RAM area, which can be moved to any RAM location, the Color RAM area is fixed, and will function normally regardless of where screen memory is located. Complex Interface Adapter (CIA) #1 Registers Locations 56320-56335 ($DCOO-$DCOF) are used to communicate with the Complex Interface Adapter chip #1 (CIA #1). This chip is a successor to the earlier VIA and PIA devices used on the VIC-20 and PET. This chip functions the same way as the VIA and PIA: It allows the 6510 microprocessor to communicate with peripheral input and output devices. The specific devices that CIA #1 'reads data from and sends data to are the joystick controllers, the paddle fire buttons, and the keyboard. In addition to its two data ports, CIA #1 has two timers, each of which can count an interval from a millionth of a second to a fifteenth of a second. Or the timers can be hooked together to count much longer intervals. CIA #1 has an interrupt line which is connected to the 6510 IRQ line. These two timers can be used to generate interrupts at specified intervals (such as the 1 /60 second interrupt used for keyboard scanning, or the more complexly timed interrupts that drive the tape read and write routines). As you will see below, the CIA chip has a host of other features to aid in Input/Output functions. 172 Page 186 56320-56321 Location Range: 56320-56321 ($DCOO$DC01) CIA #1 Data Ports A and B These registers are where the actual communication with outside devices takes place. Bits of data written to these registers can be sent to external devices, while bits of data tiiat those devices send can be read here. The keyboard is so necessary to the computer's operation that you may have a hard time thinking of it as a peripheral device. Nonetheless, it cannot be directly read by the 6510 microprocessor. Instead, the keys are connected in a matrix of eight rows by eight columns to CIA #1 Ports A and B. The layout of this matrix is shown below. READ PORT B (56321, $DC01) Bit 7 Bite Bits Bit 4 Bit 3 Bit 2 Bitl BitO STOP Q Q SPACE 2 CTRL 1 / t RIGHT SHIFT HOME • / * £ / @ • • • L P + N o K M 0 J I 9 V u H B 8 G Y 7 X T F C 6 D R 5 LEFT SHIFT E S Z 4 A W 3 CRSR DOWN f5 fS fl f7 CRSR RIGHT RETURN DELETE 173 Page 187 56320-56321 As you can see, there are two keys which do not appear in the matrix. The SHIFT LOCK key is not read as a separate key, but rather is a mechanical device which holds the left SHIFT key switch in a closed position. The RESTORE key is not read like the other keys either. It is directly connected to the NMI interrupt line of the 6510 microprocessor, and causes an NMI interrupt to occur whenever it is pressed (not just when it is pressed with the STOP key). In order to read the individual keys in the matrix, you must first set Port A for all outputs (255, $FF), and Port B for all inputs (0), using the Data Direction Registers. Note that this is the default condition. Next, you must write a 0 in the bit of Data Port A that corresponds to the column that you wish to read, and a 1 to the bits that correspond to columns you wish to ignore. You will then be able to read Data Port B to see which keys in that column are being pushed. A 0 in any bit position signifies that the key in the corresponding row of the selected column is being pressed, while a 1 indicates that the key is not being pressed. A value of 255 ($FF) means that no keys in that column are being pressed. Fortunately for us all, an interrupt routine causes the keyboard to be read, and the results are made available to the Operating System automatically every 1 /60 second. And even when the normal interrupt routine cannot be used, you can use the Kemal SCNKEY routine at 65439 ($FF9F) to read the keyboard. These same data ports are also used to read the joystick controllers. Although common sense might lead you to believe that you could read tihe joystick that is plugged into the port marked Controller Port 1 from Data Port A, and the second joystick from Data Port B, there is nothing common about the Commodore 64. Controller Port 1 is read from Data Port B, and Controller Port 2 is read from CIA #1 Data Port A. Joysticks consist of five switches, one each for the up, down, right, and left directions, and another for the fire button. The switches are read like the key switches— if the switch is pressed, the corresponding bit will read 0, and if it is not pressed, the bit will be set to 1. From BASIC, you can PEEK the ports and use the AND and NOT operators to mask the unused bits and invert the logic for easier comprehension. For example, to read the joystick in Controller Port 1, you could use the statement: S1=N0T PEEK(56321)AND15 The meaning of the possible numbers returned are: O=none pressed l=up 2= down 4=left 5= up left 6= down left 174 Page 188 56320-56321 8= right 9= up right 10=down right The same technique can be used for joystick 2, by substituting 56320 as the number to PEEK. By the way, the 3 and 7 aren't listed because they represent impossible combinations like up-down. To read the fire buttons, you can PEEK the appropriate port and use the AND operator to mask all but Bit 4: Tl =(PEEK(56321)AND16)/16 The above will return a 0 if the button is pressed, and a 1 if it is not. Substitute location 56320 as the location to PEEK for Trigger Button 2. Since CIA #1 Data Port B is used for reading the keyboard as well as joystick 1, some confusion can result. The routine that checks the keyboard has no way of telling whether a particular bit was set to 0 by a keypress or one of the joystick switches. For example, if you plug the joystick into Controller Port 1 and push the stick to the right, the routine will interpret this as the 2 key being pressed, because both set the same bit to 0. Likewise, when you read the joystick, it will register as being pushed to the right if the 2 key is being pressed. The problem of mistaking the keyboard for the joystick can be solved by turning off the keyscan momentarily when reading the stick with a POKE 56333,127:POKE 56320,255, and restoring it after the read with a POKE 56333,129. Sometimes you can use the simpler solution of clearing the keyboard buffer after reading the joystick, with a POKE 198,0. The problem of mistaking the joystick for a keypress is much more difficult — there is no real way to turn off the joystick. Many commercially available games just use Controller Port 2 to avoid the conflict. So, if you can't beat them, sit back and press your joystick to the left in order to slow down a program listing (the keyscan routine thinks that it is the CTRL key). As if all of the above were not enough. Port A is also used to control which set of paddles is read by the SID chip, and to read the paddle fire buttons. Since there are two paddles per joystick Controller Port, and only two SID registers for reading paddle positions, there has to be a method for switching the paddle read from joystick Port 1 to joystick Port 2. When Bit 7 of Port A is set to 1 and Bit 6 is cleared to 0, the SID registers read the paddles on Port 1. When Bit 7 is set to 0 and Bit 6 is set to 1, the paddles on Port 2 are read by the SID chip registers. Note that this also conflicts with the keyscan routine, which is constantly writing different values to CIA #1 Data Port A in order to select the keyboard column to read (most of the time, the value for the last column is written to this port, which coincides with the 175 Page 189

---
