# Memory Page 191

nome: FDCEND
descrizione: Table of Constants for TI$ Conversion This table contains the floating point representation of powers of -60 r~) multiplied by 1 or 10. These constants are used for converting TI$ to } ASCII. ^ 48978 $BF52 ; J Unused area This unused area is filled with bytes of 170 ($AA). 49009 $BF71 SGOI Perform SQR This routine moves the contents of FACl to FAC2, moves the constant 0.5 to FACl, and falls through to the exponentiation routine. 49019 $BF7B FPWRT Performs Exponentiation (Power Calculation Called for by UPARROW) This routine raises the value in FAC2 to the power in FACl and leaves the result in FACl. 49076 $BFB4 NEGOP Perform NOT and > This negates the Floating Point Accumulator by exclusive ORing the sign byte with a constant of 255 ($FF). Zero is left unchanged. The results of this command follow from the formula NOT X=-(X+1). Therefore, if you NOT a statement that is true (-1), you get 0 (false). 49087 $BFBF EXPCON Table of Constants for EXP and LOG in Five-Byte Floating Point Format These tables are used to calculate 2 to the N power. 49133 $BFED EXP Perform EXP This routine calculates the natural logarithm e (2.718281828...) raised to the power in FACl. The result is left in FACl. This routine is split between the BASIC ROM which ends at 49151 ($BFFF) and the Kemal ROM which begins at 57344 ($E000). Therefore, a JMP $E000 instruction is tacked on to the end, which makes the BASIC routines in the 64 Kemal ROM three bytes higher in memory than the corresponding VIC-20 routines. n 117
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 48954
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $BF3A
man: Page 131 49152-53247 4K Free RAM 49152-53247 ($COOO-$CFFF) Locations 49152 to 53247 ($C000 to $CFFF) are free RAM. Since this area is not contiguous with the BASIC program text RAM area, it is not available for BASIC program or variable storage (it is not counted in the FRE(O) total). This area is fully available for any other use, however, such as storing machine language subroutines for use with BASIC, alternate I/O drivers for parallel or IEEE devices, character graphics or sprite data, etc. This large free area is such a tempting spot for system additions that many such applications may be competing for the same RAM space. For example, the Universal Wedge DOS Support program that adds easy access to the disk communications channel is usually loaded at 52224 ($CCOO). Programs that use that part of RAM will therefore overwrite the DOS support program, with the result that they may not run correctly, or even at all. Likewise, Simon's BASIC, the extended language which Commodore has released on cartridge, uses several locations in this range. Be aware of this potential problem when you buy hardware additions that use this spot to hook into the system. 118 Page 132 Chapter 6 VIC-II, SID, I/O Devices, Color RAM, and Character ROM Page 133 The text on this page is estimated to be only 3.00% accurate □ y a P O u G U Q Page 134 - 53248-57343 G n VIC-II, SID, I/O 0 Devices, Color n RAM, and Character ROM 53248-57343 ($DOOO-$DFFF) This 4K block of memory is used for several key functions. Normally, the 6510 microprocessor addresses the two Complex Interface Adapter (CIA) Input/Output chips here, along with the VIC-II video controller chip, the Sound Interface Device (SID) music synthesizer, and the Color RAM. Alternatively, the 6510 can address the character ROM here (though normally only the VIC-II chip has access to it). Finally, there is also 4K of RAM here, although to use it may require banking it in only when necessary, as the I/O devices are needed for such niceties as reading the keyboard, and updating the screen display. It will appear from the map of the I/O devices below that many of the locations are not accounted for. That is because these devices tie up more addressing space than they actually use. Each of them uses only a few addresses, mostly on the bit level. The missing addresses either consist of images of the hardware registers, or cannot be addressed in this configuration. In addition, some address space is left open for the use of future hardware devices which might be plugged into the expansion port, like the CP/M card. m As mentioned above, memory usage by these I/O devices is so ' ^ intensive that to work with them often requires that you turn individual bits on and off. Here is a quick reminder of how to manipulate bits. ( i The bit values for each bit are: Bit 0=1, Bit 1=2, Bit 2=4, Bit 3=8, Bit 4=16, Bit 5=32, Bit 6=64, ^ Bit 7=128. ■ 3 To set a bit to 1 from BASIC, POKE address, PEEK (address) OR Bitvalue. To reset a bit to 0 from BASIC, POKE address, PEEK (address) AND 255-Bitvalue). I 1 121 / i Page 135 53248-53294 53248-53294 ($D000-$D02E) VIC-n Chip Registers The Video Interface Controller (VIC-II chip) is a specially designed processor that is in charge of the 64's video display. It is this chip which makes possible the 64's wide range of graphics capabilities. The VIC-II chip's ability to address memory is independent of the 6510 microprocessor. It can address only 16K at a time, and any of the four blocks of 16K can be chosen for video memory. The system default is for it to use the first 16K. All of the video display memory, character dot data, and sprite shapes must be stored within the chosen 16K block. Locations 53248-53294 ($D000-$D02E) are registers which allow the user to communicate with the VIC-II chip. Although for the most part they can be written to and read like ordinary memory locations, their contents directly control the video display. Since many of these locations work in close conjunction with others, a general overview of some of the different graphics systems on the 64 is in order. The most familiar type of graphics display is the ordinary text that appears when you turn the machine on. The area of RAM which is displayed on the screen is determined by the Video Matrix Base Address Nybble of the VIC-II Memory Control Register (53272, $D018). The address of the dot-data which is used to assign a shape to each text character based on an 8 by 8 matrix of lit or unlit dots is determined by the other half of the Memory Control Register at 53272 ($D018). More information on how the data is used to represent the character shapes may be foimd at the alternate entry for 53248 ($D000), the Character Generator ROM. Text character graphics may employ one of the two sets of text and graphics characters in the Character Generator ROM, or the user may substitute a completely different set of graphics or text characters in RAM. Normally, the text graphics screen uses a background color which is common to all text characters, and that value is stored in Background Color Register 0 (53281, $D021). The color of the frame around the screen is determined by the Border Color Register at 53280 ($D020). The color of each character is determined by one nybble of the Color RAM which starts at 55296 ($D800). There are, however, two variations which alter this scheme somewhat. The first is called multicolor text mode, and is set by Bit 4 of 53270 ($D016). Instead of each bit selecting either the foreground or the background color for each dot in the character, bit-pairs are used to select one of four colors for each double-width dot. This results in the horizontal resolution being cut to four dots across per character, but allows two extra colors to be introduced from Background Color Registers 1 and 2 (53282-53283, $D022-$D023). 122 Page 136 5324S-53294 The other text mode is called Extended Background Color Mode. _J In this mode, the foreground color is always selected by the Color RAM. The background color depends on the actual screen code of ^ the character. In this mode, only the first 64 character shapes are I I available, but each can have one of four different background colors. The background color for each character is determined by its ^ screen code as follows: It 1. If the screen code is from 0-63 (this includes the normal alphanumerics), the value in Background Color Register 0 (53281, #D021) will determine the background color, as is usual. 2. Characters with codes 63-255 will have the same shape as the corresponding character in the group with codes 0-63. 3. For characters with codes 63-127 (SHIFTed characters), the background colors are determined by the value in Background Color Register 1 (53282, $D022). 4. The value in Background Color Register 2 (53283, $D023) is used for characters with codes 128-191 (reversed alphanumerics). 5. For characters with codes 192-255, the value in Background Color Register 3 (53284, $D024) is used to determine the background color. In place of the normal text mode, a bitmap graphics mode is also available by setting Bit 5 of location 53265 ($D011). In this mode, each bit of data determines whether one dot on the screen will be set to either the background color or foreground color. Within an 8 by 8 dot area, the foreground and background colors may be individually selected. The bitmap area is 320 dots wide and 200 dots high. The area which contains the graphics data, the bitmap is determined by the Character Dot Data Base Address in the lower nybble of the VIC-II Memory Control Register (53272, $D018). The Video Matrix Base Address in the upper nybble, which normally determines which area of memory will be displayed, instead determines where the color memory for each 8 by 8 group of dots will be located. The Color RAM is not used for high-resolution bitmap graphics. But multicolor mode is also available for bitmap graphics, and it uses the Color RAM to determine the foreground color of each dot. As with multicolor text mode, the horizontal resolution is cut in half (to 160 dots across), so that in addition to the foreground and background colors, each dot can be one of two other colors as well. This mode gets the value for the two extra colors from the two nybbles of each byte of bitmap color memory, the location of which is determined by the Video Matrix Base Address. Multicolor text mode offers four colors, three of which will be common to all characters, and one of which can be selected individually. Multicolor bitmap mode offers a choice of four colors, three of 123 Page 137 53248-53294 u which can be individually selected within an 8 by 8 dot area. ^ | The 64 also contains an entirely separate graphics system, * — ' whose character shapes, colors, and positions are derived and displayed without any reference to the Video Matrix and Character i i Dot-Data addresses. Best of all, these characters may be moved quickly and easily to any position on the screen, greatly facilitating games and animated graphics of all tj^es. This system is known as sprite graphics. [ j Sprite graphics takes its name from the graphics characters it displays, each of which is called a sprite. There are eight sprites, known as Sprites 0-7. Each sprite character is 24 dots wide by 21 dots high. This is about eight times as large as a regular text character, which is only 8 dots wide by 8 dots high. A sprite takes its shape from 63 bytes of data in one of the 256 data blocks, each 64 bytes long, that can fit into the 16K space which the VIC-II chip can address. The block currently assigned to any given sprite is determined by the Sprite Data Pointers, which are located at the last eight bytes of the screen memory area (the default locations are 2040-2047, $7F8-$7FF). The first Sprite Data Pointer determines the data block used for the shape of Sprite 0, the second for the shape of Sprite 1, etc. The number in the pointer times 64 equals the address of the first byte of the data block within the VIC-Il addressing range. For example, using the default values for VIC-II addressing area and screen memory, a value of 11 in location 2040 ($7F8) would mean that the shape of Sprite 0 is determined by the data in the 63byte block starting at location 704 (11*64). It should be noted that it is possible for more than one sprite to take its shape data from the same block, so that only 64 bytes of data are required to create eight sprites, each having the same shape. The dot patterns of each sprite correspond to the bit patterns of the sprite shape data. Each byte of shape data in memory consists of a number from 0 to 255. This number can be represented by eight binary digits of 0 or 1. ] j Each binary digit has a bit value that is two times greater than — ' the last. If the digit in the zero bit place is a 1, it has a value of 1 (we count bit places firom 0 to 7). A 1 in the first bit place has a val- i , ue of 2, the second bit has a value of 4, the third has a value of 8, the fourth has a value of 16, the fifth a value of 32, the sixth a value of 64, and the seventh a value of 128. By making all of the possible combinations of O's and I's in all Ij eight bit places, and adding the bit values of every bit place that contains a 1, we can represent every number from 0 to 255 as a series of I's and O's. If you think of every 0 as a dot having the same color as the background, and every 1 as a dot which is the color of the sprite. 124 u Page 138 53248-53294 you can see how a series of bytes could be used to represent the sprite shape. Since each line of the sprite is 24 dots wide, it takes 3 bytes of memory (24 bits) per line to portray its shape. Let's take a look at a couple of sample sprite lines. 00000000 01111110 00000000 =0,126,0 As you can see, the first and last bytes are all O's, so nothing will be displayed there. The middle byte has six I's, so it will be displayed as a line six dots long. By adding the values of these six bits (64+32+16+8+4+2), we get a byte value of 126. Let's try another line. 00011111 11111111 11111000 =31,255,248 The first byte has five bits set to 1, having values of 16, 8, 4, 2, and 1, for a total value of 31. The second byte has all bits set to 1, so it has the maximum value of 255. The third byte also has five bits set to 1, having values of 128, 64, 32, 16, and 8, for a total of 248. The result is that this line of sprite data will display a line that is 18 dots long. We can put these two kinds of lines together to show how a large ctoss might be drawn using bytes of sprite data. 000000000000000000000000 =0,0,0 000000000000000000000000 =0,0,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0, 126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 =0,126,0 0000000001 1 1111 000000000 = 0, 126,0 0000000001 1 1111 000000000 = 0, 126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 000111111111111111111000 =31,255,248 000111111111111111111000 =31,255,248 000111111111111111111000 =31,255,248 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 =0,126,0 000000000111111000000000 =0,126,0 000000000111111000000000 =0,126,0 000000000 1 1 1 1 1 1 000000000 = 0, 1 26,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 = 0,126,0 0000000001 1 1 1 1 1000000000 =0,126,0 000000000000000000000000 =0,0,0 000000000000000000000000 =0,0,0 The 63 numbers, displayed three per line opposite the bit patterns they represent, are the values that would have to be put in the sprite shape data area in order to display this cross using sprite graphics. Page 139 53248-53294 Even after the sprite shape data has been placed in memory, and the Sprite Data Pointer has been set to display that block of data bytes as the sprite shape, there are still several steps that must be taken in order to display the sprite on the screen. The proper bit of the Sprite Display Enable Register at 53269 ($D015) must be set to 1 in order to turn on the sprite display. A horizontal and vertical screen position must be selected for the sprite by means of the horizontal and vertical position registers (5324853264, $D000-$D010). Finally, the color value of the sprite should be placed in the appropriate Sprite Color Register (53287-53294, $D027-$D02E). Once you have the sprite on the screen, animation is fairly simple to achieve. Moving the sprite is as easy as changing the values in the sprite position registers. Changing the sprite shape can be accomplished by merely changing the Sprite Data Pointer to point to another block of shape data in memory. There are also some optional sprite graphics features available which enhance its flexibility. Sprite expand registers allow you to make each sprite twice as wide as normal, twice as tall, or both. Collision detection registers let you know when a sprite shape overlaps a regular text character or bitmap dot, or if two sprites are touching. If a sprite is positioned in the same place on the screen as a text character or bitmap dot, a Priority Register allows you to choose whether the sprite or the normal graphics will be displayed. This enables three-dimensional effects by letting you choose whether the sprite goes in front of or behind other objects on the screen. Finally, any sprite may be selected for multicolor display, using the register at location 53276 ($D01C). In this mode, as in multicolor text and bitmap modes, pairs of bits are used to determine the color of each double-width dot. The possible color values which may be selected are those of Background Color Register 0, the Sprite Color Register, or the two color values in the Sprite Multicolor Registers at 53285-53286 ($D025-$D026). Location Range: 53248-53264 ($D000$D010) Sprite Horizontal and Vertical Position Registers These locations determine the horizontal and vertical position at which each sprite will be displayed on the screen. Each sprite has its own horizontal and vertical position register. In addition, all of the sprites share a common register which is used to extend the range of horizontal positions. Vertical positions for each sprite range from 0 to 255, and these indicate the vertical position of the top line of the sprite's 21 -line length. Since there are only 200 visible scan lines in the screen dis126 Page 140

---
