# Memory Page 232

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: If at the Beginning of a Screen Line, Move Cursor to Previous Line 59595 $E8CB Check for a Color Change This routine is used by the screen CHROUT routine to check if the character to be printed is one that causes the current foreground color to change (such as the CTRL-1 combination). 59610 $E8DA PETASCII Color Code Equivalent Table This table gives the PETASCII values of the color change characters for each of the 16 possible colors. These values are: 144 ($90) Change to color 0 (black) 5 ($05) Change to color 1 (white) 28 ($1C) Change to color 2 (red) 159 ($9F) Change to color 3 (cyan) 156 ($9C) Change to color 4 (purple) 30 ($1E) Change to color 5 (green) 31 ($1F) Change to color 6 (blue) 158 ($9E) Change to color 7 (yellow) 129 ($81) Change to color 8 (orange) 149 ($95) Change to color 9 (brown) 150 ($96) Change to color 10 (light red) 151 ($97) Change to color 11 (dark gray) 152 ($98) Change to color 12 (medium gray) 153 ($99) Change to color 13 (light green) 154 ($9A) Change to color 14 (light blue) 155 ($9B) Change to color 15 (light gray) 59626 $E8EA Scroll Screen This subroutine moves all of the screen lines up, so that a blank line is created at the bottom of the screen and the top screen line is lost. If the top logical line is two physical lines long, all lines are moved up two lines. Holding down the CTRL key will cause a brief pause after the scroll. U 59571 $E8B3 U If at the End of a Screen Line, Move Cursor to the Next Line U U 59749 $E965 Insert a Blank Line on the Screen This subroutine is used when INSERTing to add a blank physical line to a logical line. 218 [_J
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 59553
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $E8A1
man: 59953 59848 $E9C8 Move Screen Line This subroutine is used by the scroll routine to move one screen line (and its associated Color RAM) up a line. 59872 $E9E0 Set Temporary Color Pointer for Scrolling This subroutine sets up a pointer in 174-175 ($AE-$AF) to the Color RAM address that corresponds to the temporary screen line address in 172-173 ($AC-$AD). 59888 $E9F0 Set Pointer to Screen Address of Start of Line This subroutine puts the address of the first byte of the screen line designated by the .X register into locations 209-210 ($D1-$D2). 59903 $E9FF Clear Screen Line This subroutine writes space characters to an entire line of screen memory, and clears the corresponding line of color memory to color in Background Color Register 0 (53281, $D021). 59923 $EA13 Set Cursor Blink Timing and Color Memory Address for Print to Screen This subroutine sets the cursor blink countdown and sets the pointer to Color RAM. It then falls through to the next routine. 59932 $EA1C Store to Screen This routine stores the character in the .A register to the screen address pointed to by 209 ($D1), and stores the color in the .X register to the address pointed to by 243 ($F3). 59940 $EA24 Synchronize Color RAM Pointer to Screen Line Pointer This subroutine sets the pointer at 243 ($F3) to the address of the beginning of the line of Color RAM which corresponds to the current line of screen RAM (whose pointer is at 209, $D1). 59953 $EA31 IRQ Interrupt Entry This is the entry point to the standard IRQ interrupt handler. Timer A of CIA #1 is set at power-on to cause an IRQ interrupt to occur 219 60039 every 1/60 second. When the intenupt occurs, program flow is transferred here via the CINV vector at 788 ($314). This routine updates the software clock at 160-162 ($A0-$A2), handles the cursor flash, and maintains the tape interlock which keeps the cassette motor on if a button is pushed and the interlock flag is on. Finally, it calls the keyboard scan routine, which checks the keyboard and puts any character it finds into the keyboard buffer. 60039 $EA87 SCNKEY Read the Keyboard This subroutine is called by the IRQ interrupt handler above to read the keyboard device which is connected to CIA #1 (see the entry for 56320, $DCOO for details on how to read the keyboard). It is the Kemal routine SCNKEY which can be entered from the jump table at 65439 ($FF9F). This routine returns the keycode of the key currently being pressed in 203 ($CB), sets the shift/control flag if appropriate, and jumps through the vector at 655 ($28F) to the routine that sets up the proper table to translate the keycode to PETASCII. It concludes with the next routine, which places the PETASCII value of the character in the keyboard buffer. 60128 $EAEO Decode the Keystroke and Place Its ASCII Value in the Keyboard Buffer This is the continuation of the IRQ keyscan routine. It decodes the keycode with the proper PETASCII table, and compares it with the last keystroke. If it is the same, it checks to see if it is okay to repeat the character without waiting for the key to be let up. If the character should be printed, it is moved to the end of the keyboard buffer at 631 ($277). 60232 $EB48 Set Up the Proper Keyboard Decode Table This routine is pointed to by the vector at 655 ($28F). Its function is to read the shift/control flag at 653 ($28D), and set the value of the decode table pointer at 245 ($F5) accordingly. First it checks if the SHIFT/Commodore logo combination was pressed, and if the toggle enable at 657 ($291) will allow a change, the character set will be changed to lowercase/uppercase or uppercase/graphics by changing the VIC Memory Control Register at 53272 ($D018), and no character will be printed. Next it sets the decode table pointer. There are 64 keys, and each can have four different PETASCII values, depending on whether the key is pressed by itself, or in combination with the SHIFT, CTRL, or Commodore logo keys. Therefore, there are four tables of 220 I { n n n n 60484 64 entries each to translate the keycode to PETASCII: the standard table, the SHIFT table, the Commodore logo table, and the CONTROL table. The routine will set up the pointer for the appropriate table, depending on whether the SHIFT, CTRL, or logo key was pressed. The CTRL key takes precedence, so that if another of these keys is pressed along with the CTRL key, the CONTROL table is used. 60281 $EB79 Keyboard Decode Table Vectors This table contains the two-byte addresses of the four keyboard decode tables ill low-byte, high-byte format. 60289 $EB81 Standard Keyboard Matrix Decode Table This table contains the 64 PETASCII values for the standard keyboard, one for each key which is struck by itself. The table is in keycode order (see the keycode table in Appendix H for the correspondence of keycode to key). A 65th byte with the value of 255 ($FF) marks the end of the table (this corresponds to a keypress value of 64, no key pressed). 60354 $EBC2 SHIFTed Keyboard Matrix Decode Table This table contains the 64 PETASCII values for the shifted keyboard, one for each key which is struck while the SHIFT key is pressed. The table is in keycode order (see the keycode table in Appendix H for the correspondence of keycode to key). A 65th byte with the value of 255 ($FF) marks the end of the table (this corresponds to a keypress value of 64, no key pressed). 60419 $EC03 Commodore Logo Keyboard Matrix Decode Table This table contains the 64 PETASCII values for the logo keyboard, one for each key which is struck while the Commodore logo key is pressed. The table is in keycode order (see the keycode table in Appendix H for the correspondence of keycode to key). A 65th byte with the value of 255 ($FF) marks the end of the table (this corresponds to a keypress value of 64, no key pressed). ' 60484 $EC44 Set Lowercase/Uppercase or Uppercase/Graphics Character Set Tl The part of the Kemal CHROUT routine that outputs to the screen ■ uses this subroutine to check for the special nonprinting characters that switch the character set (CHR$(14) and CHR$(142)). If one of 221 60510 these is the character to be printed, this routine makes the switch by setting location 53272 ($D018) accordingly. 60510 $EC5E Set Flag to Enable or Disable Switching Character Sets This subroutine is also used to check for special characters to print. In this case, it checks for the characters that enable or disable the SHIFT/logo combination from toggling the character set currently in use (CHR$(8) and CHR$(9)). If one of these is to be printed, the flag at 657 ($291) is changed. 60536 $EC78 Control Keyboard Matrix Decode Table This table contains the 64 PETASCII values for the Control keyboard, one for each key which is struck while the CTRL key is pressed. The table is in keycode order (see the keycode table in Appendix H for the correspondence of keycode to key). A 65th byte with the value of 255 ($FF) marks the end of the table (this corresponds to a keypress value of 64, no key pressed). The only keys generally struck in combination with the CTRL key are the ones that change the colors on the top row of the keyboard, but this doesn't necessarily mean that the other CTRL key combinations don't do anything. On the contrary, looking at the values in this table, you can see that any of the first 32 values in the PETASCII table can be produced by some combination of the CTRL key and another key. CTRL-@ produces CHR$(0). CTRL-A through CTRL-Z produce CHR$(1) through CHR$(26). CTRL-: is the same as CHR$(27), CTRL-Lira (that's the slashed-L British pound sign) produces CHR$(28), CTRL-; equals CHR$(29), CTRL-up arrow produces CHR$(30), and CTRL-= produces CHR$(31). Any of these combinations produce the same effect as the CHR$(X) statement. For example, CTRL-; moves the cursor over to the right, CTRL-N switches to lowercase, CTRL-R turns on reverse video, and CTRL-E changes the printing to white. 60601 $ECB9 Video Chip Register Default Table This table contains the default values that are stored in the 47 VIC-II chip registers. It is interesting to note that this table appears to be incomplete. While Sprite Color Registers 0-6 are initialized to values of 1-7, Sprite Color Register 7 is initialized to 76 — the ASCII value of the letter L which begins on the next table. 60647 $ECE7 Text for Keyboard Buffer When SfflFT/RUN Is Pressed When the SHIFT and RUN keys are pressed, the ASCII text stored 222 n n I \ 60857 here is forced into the keyboard buffer. That text is LOAD, carriage return, RUN, carriage return. 60656 $ECFO Low Byte Table of Screen Line Addresses This table holds the low byte of the screen address for lines 0-24. The high byte is derived from combining a value from the screen line link table at 217 ($D9) vy^ith the pointer to screen memory at 648 ($288). 60681 $ED09 TALK Send TALK to a Device on the Serial Bus This is a documented Kernal routine whose entry in the jump table is 65460 ($FFB4). When called, it ORs the device number in the Accumulator with the TALK code (64, $40) and sends it on the serial bus. This commands the device to TALK. 60684 $EDOC LISTEN Send LISTEN to a Device on the Serial Bus This is a documented Kernal routine whose entry in the jump table is 65457 ($FFB1). When called, it ORs the device number in the Accumulator with the LISTEN code (32, $20) and sends it on the serial bus. This commands the device to LISTEN. 60689 $ED11 Send Command Code to a Device on the Serial Bus This subroutine is used in common by many Kernal routines to send the command code in the Accumulator to a device on the serial bus. 60736 $ED40 Send a Byte on the Serial Bus This subroutine is used in common by several Kernal routines to send the byte in the serial bus character buffer at 149 ($95) on the serial bus. 60848 $EDBO Time-Out Error on Serial Bus This subroutine handles the case when the device does not respond by setting the DEVICE NOT PRESENT error code and exiting. 60857 $EDB9 SECOND Send a Secondary Address to a Device on the Serial Bus after LISTEN This is a documented Kernal routine that can be entered from the jump table at 65427 ($FF93). It sends a secondary address from the 223 60871 Accumulator to the device on the serial bus that has just beer\ commanded to LISTEN. This is usually done to give the device more particular instructions on how the I/O is to be carried out before information is sent. 60871 $EDC7 TKSA Send a Secondary Address to a Device on the Serial Bus after TALK This is a documented Kemal routine that can be entered from the jump table at 65430 ($FF96). It sends a secondary address from the Accumulator to the device on the serial bus that has just been commanded to TALK. This is usually done to give the device more particular instructions on how the I/O is to be carried out before information is sent. 60893 $EDDD CIOUT Send a Byte to an I/O Device over the Serial Bus This is a documented Kemal routine which can be entered from the jump table at 65448 ($FFA8). Its purpose is to send a byte of data over the serial bus. In order for the data to be received, the serial device must have first been commanded to LISTEN and been given a secondary address if necessary. This routine always buffers the current character, and defers sending it until the next byte is buffered. When the UNLISTEN command is sent, the last byte will be sent with an End or Identify (EOI). 60911 $EDEF UNTLK Send UNTALK to a Device on the Serial Bus This is a documented Kemal routine whose entry in the jump table is 65451 ($FFAB). When called, it sends the UNTALK code (95, $5F) on the serial bus. This commands any TALKer on the bus to stop sending data. 60926 $EDFE UNLSN Send UNLISTEN to a Device on the Serial Bus This is a documented Kemal routine whose entry in the jump table is 65454 ($FFAE). It sends the UNLISTEN code (63, $3F) on the serial bus. This commands any LISTENers to get off the serial bus, and frees up the bus for other users. 60947 $EE13 ACPTR Receive a Byte of Data from a Device on the Serial Bus This is a documented Kemal routine whose entry point in the jump table is 65445 ($FFA5). When called, it will get a byte of data from the current TALKer on the serial bus and store it in the Accumulator. 224 61230 |i In order to receive the data, the device must have previously been sent a command to TALK and a secondary address if it needs one. 61061 $EE85 ' I Set the Serial Clock Line Low (Active) This subroutine clears the serial bus clock pulse output bit (Bit 4 of CIA #2 Data Port A at 56576, $DDOO). I \ 61070 $EE8E Set the Serial Clock Line High Onactive) This subroutine sets the serial bus clock pulse output bit to 1 (Bit 4 of CIA #2 Data Port A at 56576, $DDOO). 61079 $EE97 Set Serial Bus Data Output Line Low This subroutine clears the serial bus data output bit to 0 (Bit 5 of CIA #2 Data Port A at 56576, $DDOO). 61088 $EEAO Set Serial Bus Data Output Line High This subroutine sets the serial bus data output bit to 1 (Bit 5 of CIA #2 Data Port A at 56576, $DDOO). 61097 $EEA9 Get Serial Bus Data Input Bit and Clock Pulse Input Bit This subroutine reads the serial bus data input bit and clock pulse input bit (Bits 7 and 6 of CIA #2 Data Port A at 56576, $DDOO), and returns the data bit in the Carry flag and the clock bit in the Negative flag. 61107 $EEB3 II Perform a One-Millisecond Delay ^ 61115 $EEBB [[ Send Next RS-232 Bit (NMI) This subroutine is called by the NMI interrupt handler routine to send the next bit of data to the RS-232 device. n 61230 $EF2E Handle RS-232 Errors This subroutine sets the appropriate error bits in the status register at 663 ($297). 225 61258 61258 $EF4A Set the Word Length For the Current RS-232 Character This routine takes the number of data bits to send per RS-232 character from the control register and puts it into the .X register for use by the RS-232 routines. 61273 $EF59 Receive Next RS-232 Bit (NMI) This routine is called by the NMI interrupt handler routine to receive the next bit of data from the RS-232 device. 61310 $EF7E Setup to Receive a New Byte from RS-232 61328 $EF90 Test If Start Bit Received from RS-232 61335 #EF97 Put a Byte of Received Data into RS-232 Receive Buffer This routine checks for a Receive Buffer Overrun, stores the byte just received in the RS-232 receive buffer, and checks for Parity Error, Framing Error, or Break Detected Error. It then sets up to receive the next byte. 61409 #EFE1 CHKOUT for the RS-232 Device The Kemal CHKOUT routine calls this subroutine to define the RS232 device's logical file as an output channel. Before this can be done, the logical file must first be OPENed. 61460 $F014 CHROUT for the RS-232 Device The Kemal CHROUT routine calls this subroutine to output a character to the RS-232 device. After the logical file has been OPENed and set for output using CHKOUT, the CHROUT routine is used to actually send a byte of data. 61517 $F04D CHKIN for the RS-232 Device The Kemal CHKIN routine calls this subroutine to define the RS-232 device's logical file as an input channel. A prerequisite for this is that the logical file first be OPENed. 226 n n n 61758 M 61574 $F086 GETIN for the RS-232 Device The Kernal GETIN routine calls this subroutine to remove the next j ( byte of data from the RS-232 receive buffer and return it in the Accumulator. The routine checks for the Receive Buffer Empty Error. It is also called by the Kernal CHRIN routine, which essentially does ^ the same thing as GETIN for the RS-232 device. 61604 $F0A4 stop CIA #2 RS-232 NMIs for Serial/Cassette Routines This subroutine turns off the NMIs that drive the RS-232 routines before any I/O is done using the serial bus or cassette device. Such interrupts could throw off the timing of those I/O routines, and interfere with the transmission of data. 61629 $FOBD Kernal Control Messages The ASCII text of the Kernal I/O control messages is stored here. The last byte of every message has Bit 7 set to 1 (ASCII value+128). The messages are: I/O ERROR SEARCHING FOR PRESS PLAY ON TAPE PRESS RECORD & PLAY ON TAPE LOADING SAVING VERIFYING FOUND OK 61739 $F12B Print Kernal Error Message If in Direct Mode This routine first checks location 157 ($9D) to see if the messages are enabled. If they are, it prints the message indexed by the .Y register. 61758 $F13E GETIN Get One Byte from the Input Device This is a documented Kernal routine whose jump table entry point is at 65508 ($FFE4). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 810 ($32A). Its function is to get a character from the current input device (whose device number is stored at 153, $99). In practice, it operates identically to the CHRIN routine below for all devices except for the keyboard. If the keyboard is the current input device, this routine 227 61783 gets one character from the keyboard buffer at 631 ($277). It depends on the IRQ interrupt routine to read the keyboard and put characters into the buffer. 61783 $F157 CHRIN Input a Character from the Current Device This is a documented Kemal routine whose jump table entry point is at 65487 ($FFCF). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 804 ($324). Its function is to get a character from the current input device (whose device number is stored at 153, $99). This device must first have been OPENed and then designated as the input channel by the CHKIN routine. When this routine is called, the next byte of data available from this device is returned in the Accumulator. The only exception is the routine for the keyboard device (which is the default input device). If the keyboard is the current input device, this routine blinks the cursor, fetches characters from the keyboard buffer, and echoes them to the screen until a carriage return is encountered. When a carriage return is found, the routine sets a flag to indicate the length of the last logical line before the return character, and reads the first character of this logical line from the screen. Subsequent calls to this routine will cause the next character in the line to be read from the screen and returned in the Accumulator, until the carriage return character is returned to indicate the end of the line. Any call after this character is received will start the whole process over again. Note that only the last logical line before the carriage return is used. Any time you type in more than 80 characters, a new logical line is started. This routine will ignore any characters on the old logical line, and process only the most recent 80-character group. 61898 $F1CA CHROUT Output a Byte This is a documented Kemal routine whose jump table entry point is at 65490 ($FFD2). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 806 ($326). It is probably one of the best known and most used Kemal routines, because it sends the character in the Accumulator to the current output device. Unless a device has been OPENed and designated as the current output channel using the CHKOUT routine, the character is printed to the screen, which is the default output device. If the cassette is the current device, outputting a byte will only add it to the buffer. No actual transmission of data will occur until the 192byte buffer is full. 228 62097 61966 $F20E CHKIN Designate a Logical File As the Current Input Channel This is a documented Kemal routine which can be entered from the jump table at 65478 ($FFC6). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 798 ($31E). If you wish to get data from any device other than the keyboard, this routine must be called after OPENing the device, before you can get a data byte with the CHRIN or GETIN routine. When called, the routine will designate the logical file whose file number is in the .X register as the current file, its device as the current device, and its secondary address as the current secondary address. If the device on the channel is a serial device, which requires a TALK command and sometimes a secondary address, this routine will send them over the serial bus. 62032 $F250 CHKOUT Designate a Logical File As the Current Output Channel This is a documented Kernal routine which can be entered from the jump table at 65481 ($FFC9). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 800 ($320). If you wish to output data to any device other than the screen, this routine must be called after OPENing the device, and before you output a data byte with the CHROUT routine. When called, the routine will designate the logical file whose file number is in the .X register as the current file, its device as the current device, and its secondary address as the current secondary address. If the device on the channel uses the serial bus, and therefore requires a LISTEN command and possibly a secondary address, this information will be sent on the bus. 62097 $F291 CLOSE Close a Logical I/O File CLOSE is a documented Kemal routine which can be entered via the jump table at 65475 ($FFC3). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 796 ($31C). It is r— , used to close a logical file after all I/O operations involving that file 1 I have been completed. This is accomplished by loading the Accumulator with the logical file number of the file to be closed, and calling this routine. f{ Closing an RS-232 file will de-allocate space at the top of memory for the receiving and transmit buffers. Closing a cassette file that was opened for writing will force the last block to be written to caspn sette, even if it is not a full 192 bytes. Closing a serial bus device ' ! wUl send an UNLISTEN command on the bus. Remember, it is 229 n 62223 necessary to properly CLOSE a cassette or disk data file in order to retrieve the file later. For all types of files, CLOSE removes the file's entry from the tables of logical files, device, and secondary address at 601, 611, and 621 ($259, $263, $26D), and moves all higher entries in the table down one space. 62223 $F30F Find the File in the Logical File Table This subroutine is used by many Kernal routines to find the position of the logical file in the logical file table at 601 ($259). 62239 $F31F Set Current Logical File, Current Device, and Current Secondary Address This subroutine is used to update the Kernal variables at 184-186 ($B8-$BA) which hold the current logical file number, current device number, and current secondary address number. 62255 $F32F CLALL Close All Logical I/O Files CLALL is a documented Kernal routine whose entry point in the jump table is 65511 ($FFE7). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 812 ($32C). It closes all open files, by resetting the index into open files at 152 ($98) to zero. It then falls through to the next routine, which restores the default I/O devices. 62259 $F333 CLRCHN Restore Current Input and Output Devices to the Default Devices This is a documented Kernal Routine which can be entered at location 65484 ($FFCC) in the jump table. The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 802 ($322). It sets the current input device to the keyboard, and the current output device to the screen. Also, if the current input device was formerly a serial device, the routine sends it an UNTALK command on the serial bus, and if a serial device was formerly the current output device, the routine sends it an UNLISTEN command. 62282 $F34A OPEN open a Logical I/O File OPEN is a documented Kernal I/O routine. It can be entered from the jump table at 65472 ($FFCO). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 794 ($31 A). This routine assigns a logical file to a device, so that it can be used for 230 62941 Input/Output operations. In order to specify the logical file number, the device number, and the secondary address if any, the SETLFS routine must first be called. Likewise, in order to designate the filename, the SETNAM routine must be used first. After these two routines are called, OPEN is then called. 62622 $F49E LOAD ] ~| Load RAM from a Device This is a documented Kernal routine, whose entry in the jump table appears at 65493 ($FFD5). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 816 ($330). LOAD is used to transfer data from a device directly to RAM. It can also be used to verify RAM, comparing its contents to those of a disk or tape file. To choose between these operations you must set the Accumulator with a 0 for a LOAD, or a 1 for a VERIFY. Since the LOAD routine performs an OPEN, it must be preceded by a call to the SETLFS routine to specify the logical file number, device number, and secondary address, and a call to the SETNAM routine to specify the filename (a LOAD from tape can be performed without a filename being specified). Then the .X and .Y registers should be set with the starting address for the load, and the LOAD routine called. If the secondary address specified was a 1, this starting address will be ignored, and the header information will be used to supply the load address. If the secondary address was a 0, the address supplied by the call will be used. In either case, upon return from the routine, the .X and .Y registers will contain the address of the highest RAM location that was loaded. 62885 $F5A5 Print SEARCHING Message If in Direct Mode 62930 $F5D2 Print LOADING or VERIFYING n 62941 $F5DD SAVE Save RAM to a Device This is a documented Kernal routine, whose entry in the jump table appears at 65496 ($FFD8). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 818 ($332). SAVE '~j is used to transfer data directly from RAM to an I/O device. Since ' the SAVE routine performs an OPEN, it must be preceded by a call to the SETLFS routine to specify the logical file number, device n number, and secondary address, and a call to the SETNAM routine to specify the filename (although a SAVE to the cassette can be performed without giving a filename). A  pointer to the starting ' ^ 231 63119 address of the area to be saved should be set up, with the low byte of the address first. The accumulator should be loaded with the  offset of that pointer, then the .X and .Y registers should be set with the ending address for the save, and the SAVE routine called. 63119 $F68F If in Direct Mode, Print SAVING and Filename 63131 $F69B UDTIM Update the Software Clock and Check for the STOP Key UDTIM is a documented Kemal routine which can be entered through the jump table at 65514 ($FFEA). It is normally called by the IRQ interrupt handler once every sixtieth of a second. It adds one to the value in the three-byte software jiffy clock at 160-162 ($A0-$A2), and sets the clock back to zero when it reaches the 24-hour point. In addition, it scans the keyboard row in which the STOP key is located, and stores the current value of that key in location 145 ($91). This variable is used by the STOP routine which checks for the STOP key. 63197 $F6DD RDTIM Read the Time From the Software Clock into the .A, .X, and .Y Registers This is a documented Kemal routine whose entry point in the jump table is 65502 ($FFDE). It reads the software clock (which counts sixtieths of a second) into the internal registers. The .Y register contains the most significant byte (from location 160, $A0), the .X register contains the middle byte (from location 161, $A1), and the Accumulator contains the least significant byte (from location 162, $A2). 63204 $F6E4 SETTIM Set the Software Clock from the .A, .X, and .Y Registers This documented Kemal routine can be entered from location 65499 ($FFDB). It performs the reverse operation from UDTIM, storing the value in the .Y register into location 160 ($A0), the .X register into 161 ($A1), and the Accumulator into 162 ($A2). Intermpts are first disabled, to make sure that the clock will not be updated while being set. 63213 $F6ED STOP Test STOP Key STOP is a documented Kemal routine which can be entered from the jump table at location 65505 ($EFE1). 232 63511 It is vectored through RAM at 808 ($328). The routine checks to ~~ see if the STOP key was pressed during the last UDTIM call. If it was, the Zero flag is set to 1, the CLRCHN routine is called to set the input and output devices back to the keyboard and screen, and - the keyboard queue is emptied. r-^ 63227 $F6FB I J Set Kernal I/O Error Message This subroutine is used to handle I/O errors from Kernal I/O routines. It calls CLRCHN to restore default I/O devices. If Bit 6 of the flag at 157 ($9D) is set, it prints I/O ERROR followed by the error number, and then sets the Carry flag to indicate an error, with the error number in the Accumulator. The Kernal error messages are not used by BASIC, but may be used by machine language monitors and other applications. 63276 $F72C Get Next Tape File Header from Cassette This routine reads in tape blocks until it finds a file header block. It then prints the FOUND message along with the first 16 characters of the filename. 63338 $F76A Write Tape File Header Block 63440 $F7D0 Put Pointer to Tape Buffer in .X and .Y Registers 63447 $F7D7 Set I/O Area Start and End Pointers to Tape Buffer Start and End Address ^ 63466 $F7EA I 1^ Search Tape for a Filename _ 63511 $F817 Test Cassette Buttons and Handle Messages for Tape Read This routine tests the sense switch, and if no buttons are depressed it prints the PRESS PLAY ON TAPE message, and loops until a cassette button is pressed, or until the STOP key is pressed. If a button is pressed, it prints the message OK. Since the message printing routine is entered after the test for direct mode, these messages cannot be suppressed by changing the flag at 157 ($9D). You could have them harmlessly printed to ROM, however, by changing the value of HIBASE at 648 ($288) temporarily to 160, and then back to 4. 233 63534 63534 $F82E Check Cassette Switch This subroutine is used to check if a button on the recorder has been pressed. 63544 $F838 Test Cassette Buttons and Handle Messages for Tape Write This routine tests the sense switch, and if no buttons are depressed it prints the PRESS PLAY & RECORD message, and loops until a cassette button is pressed, or until the STOP key is pressed. If a button is pressed, it prints the message OK. These messages cannot be suppressed by changing the flag at 157 ($9D). See the entiry for 63511 ($F817) for more information. 63553 $F841 Start Reading a Block of Data from the Cassette This subroutine tests the cassette switch and initializes various flags for reading a block of data from cassette. 63588 $F864 start Writing a Block of Data to the Cassette This subroutine tests the cassette switch and initializes various flags for writing a block of data to cassette. 63605 $F875 Common Code for Reading a Data Block from Tape and Writing a Block to Tape This routine sets the actual reading or writing of a block of data. It sets CIA #1 Timer B to call the IRQ which drives the actual reading or writing routine, saves the old IRQ vector, and sets the new IRQ vector to the read or write routine. It also blanks the screen so that the video chip's memory addressing (which normally takes away some of the 6510 microprocessor's addressing time) will not interfere with the timing of the routines. 63696 $F8D0 Test the STOP Key during Cassette I/O Operations This subroutine is used to test the STOP key during tape I/O operations, and to stop I/O if it is pressed. 63714 $F8E2 Adjust CIA #1 Timer A for Tape Bit Timing 234 n n 64659 63788 $F92C Read Tape Data (IRQ) This is the IRQ handler routine that is used for reading data from the cassette. At the end of the read, the IRQ vector is restored to the normal IRQ routine. n 64096 $FA60 Receive and Store the Next Character from Cassette This is the part of the cassette read IRQ routine that actually gets the next byte of data from the cassette. 64398 $FB8E Move the Tape SAVE/LOAD Address into the Pointer at 172 ($AC) 64407 $FB97 Reset Counters for Reading or Writing a New Byte of Cassette Data 64422 $FBA6 Toggle the Tape Data Output Line This routine sets CIA #1 Timer B, and toggles the Tape Data Output line on the 6510 on-chip I/O port (Bit 3 of location 1). 64456 $FBC8 Write Data to Cassette— Part 2 (IRQ) This IRQ handler routine is one part of the write data to cassette routine. 64618 $FC6A Write Data to Cassette— Part 1 (IRQ) This IRQ handler routine is the other part of the write data to cassette routine. n 64659 $FC93 Restores the Default IRQ Routine At the end of tape I/O operations, this subroutine is used to turn the {I screen back on and stop the cassette motor. It then resets CIA #1 Timer A to generate an interrupt every sixtieth of a second, and restores the IRQ vector to point to the normal interrupt routine that P~! updates the software clock and scans the keyboard. 235 64696 64696 $FCB8 Terminate Cassette I/O This routine calls the subroutine above and returns from the interrupt. 64714 $FCCA Turn off the Tape Motor 64721 $FCD1 Check the Tape Read/Write Pointer This routine compares the current tape read/write address with the ending read/write address. 64731 $FCDB Advance the Tape Read/Write Pointer This routine is used to move the pointer to the current read/ write address up a byte. 64738 $FCE2 Power-On Reset Routine This is the RESET routine which is pointed to by the 6510 hardware RESET vector at 65532 ($FFFC). This routine is automatically executed when the computer is first turned on. First, it sets the Interrupt disable flag, sets the stack pointer, and clears the Decimal mode flag. Next it tests for an autostart cartridge. If one is found, the routine immediately jumps through the cartridge cold start vector at 32768 ($8000). If no cartridge is found, the Kemal initialization routines lOINIT, RAMTAS, RESTOR, and CINT are called, the Interrupt disable flag is cleared, and the BASIC program is entered through the cold start vector at 40960 ($A000). 64770 $FD02 Check for Autostart Cartridge This routine tests for an autostart cartridge by comparing the characters at locations 32772-6 ($8004-8) to the text below. The Zero flag will be set if they match, and cleared if they don't. 64784 $FD10 Text for Autostart Cartridge Check The characters stored here must be the fifth through ninth characters in the cartridge in order for it to be started on power-up. These characters are the PETASCII values for CBM, each with the high bit set ( + 128), and the characters "80". 236 64848 64789 $FD15 RESTOR Restore RAM Vectors for Default I/O Routines This documented Kemal routine can be entered through the jump table at 65418 ($FF8A). It sets the values for the 16 RAM vectors to the interrupt and important Kemal I/O routines in the table that starts at 788 ($314) to the standard values held in the ROM table at 64816 ($FD30) below. 64794 $FD1A VECTOR Set the RAM Vector Table from the Table Pointed to by .X and .Y This documented Kemal routine can be entered through the jump table at 65421 ($FF8D). It is used to read or change the values for the 16 RAM vectors to the interrupt and important Kemal I/O routines in the table that starts at 788 ($314). If the Carry flag is set when the routine is called, the current value of the 16 vectors will be stored at a table whose address is pointed to by the values in the .X and .Y registers. If the Carry flag is cleared, the RAM vectors will be loaded from the table whose address is pointed to by the .X and .Y registers. Since this routine can change the vectors for the IRQ and NMI intermpts, you might expect that the Interrupt disable flag would be set at its beginning. Such is not the case, however, and therefore it would be wise to execute an SEI before calling it and a CLI afterwards (as the power-on RESET routine does) just to be safe. 64816 $FD30 Table of RAM Vectors to the Default I/O Routines This table contains the 16 RAM I/O vectors that are moved to 788819 ($314- $333). 64848 $FD50 RAMTAS Perform RAM Test and Set Pointers to the Top and Bottom of RAM This documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through location 65415 ($FF87) of the jump table, performs a number of initialization tasks. First, it clears Pages 0, 2, and 3 of memory to zeros. Next, it sets the tape buffer pointer to address 828 ($33C), and performs a nondestructive test of RAM from 1024 ($400) up. When it reaches a nonRAM address (presumably the BASIC ROM at 40960, $A000), that address is placed in the top of memory pointer at 643-4 ($283-4). The bottom of memory pointer at 641-2 ($281-2) is set to point to address 2048 ($800), which is the beginning of BASIC program text. 237 64923 Finally, the pointer to screen memory at 648 ($288) is set to 4, which lets the Operating System know that screen memory starts at 1024 ($400). 64923 $FD9B Table of IRQ Vectors This table holds the vectors to the four IRQ routines which the system uses. The first points to Part 1 of the cassette write routine at 64618 ($FC6A), the second to Part 2 of the cassette write routine at 64461 ($FBCD), the third to the standard scan-keyboard IRQ at 59953 ($EA31), and the last to the cassette read routine at 63788 ($F92C). 64931 $FDA3 lOINIT Initialize CIA I/O Devices This documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through the jump table at 65412 ($FF84), initializes the Complex Interface Adapter (CIA) devices, and turns the volume of the SID chip off. As part of this initialization, it sets CIA #1 Timer A to cause an IRQ interrupt every sixtieth of a second. 65017 $FDF9 SETNAM Set Filename Parameters This is a documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through the jump table at location 65469 ($FFBD). It puts the value in the Accumulator into the location which stores the number of characters in the filename, and sets the pointer to the address of the ASCII text of the filename from the .X and .Y registers. This sets up the filename for the OPEN, LOAD, or SAVE routine. 65024 $FEOO SETLFS Set Logical File Number, Device Number, and Secondary Address This is a documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through the jump table at location 65466 ($FFBA). It stores the value in the Accumulator in the location which holds the current logical file number, the value in the .X register is put in the location tiiat holds the current device number, and the value in the .Y register is stored in the location that holds the current secondary address. If no secondary address is used, the .Y register should be set to 255 ($FF). It is necessary to set the values of the current file number, device number, and secondary address before you OPEN a file, or LOAD or SAVE. 238 65057 n n 65031 $FE07 READST Read the I/O Status Word This is a documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through the jump table at location 65463 ($FFB7). Whenever an I/O error occurs, a bit of the Status Word is set to indicate what the problem was. This routine allows you to read the status word (it is returned in the Accumulator). If the device was the RS-232, its status register is read and cleared to zero. For the meanings of the various status codes, see the entry for location 144 ($90) or 663 ($297) for the RS-232 device. 65048 $FE18 SETMSG Set the Message Control Flag This documented Kernal routine can be entered through its jump table vector at 65424 ($FF90). The routine controls the printing of error messages and control messages by the Kemal. If Bit 6 is set to 1 (bit value of 64), Kemal control messages can be printed. These messages include SEARCHING FOR, LOADING, and the like. If Bit 6 is cleared to 0, these messages will not be printed (BASIC vdll clear this bit when a program is running so that the messages do not appear when I/O is performed from a program). Setting Bit 6 will not suppress the PRESS PLAY ON TAPE or PRESS PLAY & RECORD messages, however. If Bit 7 is set to 1 (bit value of 128), Kemal error messages can be printed. If Bit 7 is set to 0, those error messages (for example, I/O ERROR #nn) vdll be suppressed. Note that BASIC has its own set of error messages (such as FILE NOT FOUND ERROR) which it uses in preference to the Kemal's message. 65057 $FE21 SETTMO Set Time-Out Flag for IEEE Bus This documented Kemal routine can be entered from the jump table at 65442 ($FFA2). The routine sets the time-out flag for the IEEE bus. When timeouts are enabled, the Commodore 64 will wait for a device for 64 milliseconds, and if it does not receive a response to its signal it vnll issue a time-out error. Loading the Accumulator with a value less than 128 and calling this routine will enable time-outs, while using a value over 128 will disable time-outs. This routine is for use only with the Commodore IEEE add-on card, which at the time of this writing was not yet available. n I i n 239 65061 65061 $FE25 MEMTOP Read/Set Top of RAM Pointer This is a documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through the jump table at location 65433 ($FF99). It can be used to either read or set the top of RAM pointer. If called with the Carry flag set, the address in the pointer will be loaded into the .X and .Y registers. If called with the Carry flag cleared, the pointer will be changed to the address found in the .X and .Y registers. 65076 $FE34 MEMBOT Read/Set Bottom of RAM Pointer This is a documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through the jump table at location 65436 ($FF9C). It can be used to either read or set the bottom of RAM pointer. If called with the Carry flag set, the address in the pointer will be loaded into the .X and .Y registers. If called with the Carry flag cleared, the pointer will be changed to the address found in the .X and .Y registers. 65091 $FE43 NMI Interrupt Entry Point This routine is the NMI interrupt handler entry, which is pointed to by the hardware NMI vector at 65530 ($FFFA). Any time an NMI interrupt occurs, the Interrupt disable flag will be set, and the routine will jump through the RAM vector at 792 ($318), which ordinarily points to the continuation of this routine. The standard handler first checks to see if the NMI was caused by the RS-232 device. If not, the RESTORE key is assumed. The routine checks for a cartridge, and if one is fotmd it exits through the cartridge warm start vector at 32770 ($8002). If not, the STOP key is checked, and if it is being pressed, the BRK routine is executed. If the RS-232 device was the cause of the NMI, the cartridge and STOP key checks are b)^assed, and the routine skips to the end, where it checks whether it is time to send or receive a data bit via the RS-232 device. 65126 $FE66 BRK, Warm Start Routine This routine is executed when the STOP/RESTORE combination of keypresses occurs. In addition, it is the default target address of the BRK instruction vector. This routine calls the Kemal initialization routines RESTOR, lOINIT, and part of CINT. It then exits through the BASIC warm start vector at 40962 ($A002). 240 65352 65138 $FE72 NMI RS-232 Handler This is the part of the NMI handler that checks if it is time to receive or send a bit on the RS-232 channel, and takes the appropriate action if it is indeed time. 65218 $FEC2 RS-232 Baud Rate Tables for U.S. Television Standard (NTSC) This table contains the ten prescaler values for the ten standard baud rates unplemented by the RS-232 Control Register at 659 ($293). The table starts with the two values needed for the lowest baud rate (50 baud) and finishes with the entries for the highest baud rate, 2400 baud. The RS-232 routines are handled by NMI interrupts which are caused by the timers on CIA #2. Since the RS-232 device could both receive and send a bit in a single cycle, the time between interrupts should be a little less than half of the clock frequency divided by the baud rate. The exact formula used is: ((CLOCK/BAUD)/2)-100 where CLOCK is the processor clock speed and BAUD is the baud rate. The clock frequency for machines using the U.S. television standard (NTSC) is 1,022,730 cycles per second, while the frequency for the European (PAL) standard is 985,250 cycles per second. For this reason, separate baud rate tables were added for European machines at 58604 ($E4EC). 65238 $FED6 RS-232 Receive the Next Bit (NMI) The NMI handler calls this subroutine to input the next bit on the RS-232 bus. It then calls the next subroutine to reload the timer that causes the interrupts. 65306 $FF1A Load the Timer with Prescaler Values from the Baud Rate Lookup Table 65352 $FF48 Main IRQ/BRK Interrupt Entry Point The 6510 hardware IRQ/BRK vector at 65534 ($FFFE) points to this address. Anytime the BRK instruction is encountered or an IRQ interrupt occurs, this routine will be executed. The routine first saves the .A, .X, and .Y registers on the stack, and then tests the BRK bit of the status register (.P) to see if a BRK was executed. If it was, the routine 241 65371 ©dts through the RAM BRK vector at 790 ($316), where it will usually be directed to the BRK routine at 65126 ($FE66). If not, the routine exits through the RAM IRQ vector at 788 ($314), where it will usually be directed to the handler that scans the keyboard at 59953 ($EA31). If you plan to change either of these vectors to your own routine, remember to pull the stored register values off the stack before finishing. Location Ronge: 65371-65407 ($FF5B$rr7r) Patches Added to Later Kernal Versions This area contains additional code not found in the original version of the Kemal. It is used to test whether a European (PAL) or U.S. (NTSC) standard monitor is used, and to compensate so that the sixtieth of a second interrupt will be accurately timed on either system. 65371 $FF5B CINT Initialize Screen Editor and VIC-Chip This is a documented Kemal routine whose entry in the jump table is located at 65409 ($FF81). The start of the routine appears to be a patch that was added to later versions of the Kemal. It first calls the old routine at 58648 ($E518). This initializes the VIC-II chip to the default values, sets the keyboard as the input device and the screen as the output device, initializes the cursor flash variables, builds the screen line link table, clears the screen, and homes the cursor. The new code then checks the VIC intermpt register to see if the conditions for a Raster Compare IRQ have been fulfilled. Since the Raster Register was initialized to 311, that can only occur when using a PAL system (NTSC screens do not have that many scan lines). The PAL/NTSC register at 678 ($2A6) is set on the basis of the outcome of this test. The CIA #1 Timer A is then set to cause an IRQ interrupt every sixtieth of a second, using the prescaler figures for a PAL or NTSC system, as appropriate. 65390 $FF6E End of Routine to Set Timer for Sixtieth of a Second IRQ This appears to be a patch added to compensate for the extra length of the current version of this routine, which chooses either the PAL or NTSC prescaler values for the timer. 65408 $FF80 Kernal Version Identifier Byte This last byte before the jump table can be used to identify the version of the Kemal. The first version has a 170 ($AA) stored here. 242 the next version 0, and the most current version at the time of this writing has a 3 in this location. The portable SX-64 has a value of 67 ($43) at this location. The PET 64, a one-piece version with an integrated monochrome display, has an ID byte of 100 ($64). Commodore 64 Logo uses this byte to recognize the PET 64, and adjust its display accordingly. Location Range: 65409-65525 ($FF81-$FFF5) Kemal Jump Table The following jump table is provided by Commodore in an effort to maintain stable entry points for key I/O routines. Each three-byte table entry consists of a 6510 JMP instruction and the actual address of the routine in the ROM. Although the actual address of the routine may vary from machine to machine, or change in later versions of the Kemal, these addresses will stay where they are. By jumping to the entry point provided by this table, rather than directly into the ROM, you insure your programs against changes in the Operating System. In addition, this jump table may help you write programs that will function on more than one Commodore machine. The 15 table entries from 65472-65514 ($FFCO-$FFEA) are the same for all Commodore machines, from the earliest PET on. As an additional aid, some of these routines are also vectored through the table which starts at 788 ($314). Since this table is in RAM, you can change those vectors to point to your own routines which support additional I/O devices. Programs that use the jump table entry points to the I/O routines will be able to use these I/O devices without a problem. The following table will give the entry point, routine name, RAM vector if any, its current address, and a brief summary of its function. 65409 ($FF81) CIN f (65371, $FF5B) initialize screen editor and video chip 65412 ($FF84) lOINIT (64931, $FDA3) initialize I/O devices 65415 ($FF87) RAMTAS (64848, $FD50) initialize RAM, tape buffer, screen 65418 ($FF8A) RESTOR (64789, $FD15) restore default I/O vectors 65421 ($FF8D) VECTOR (64794, $FD1A) read/set I/O vector table 65424 ($FF90) SETMSG (65048, $FE18) set Kemal message control flag 65427 ($FF93) SECOND (60857, $EDB9) send secondary address after LISTEN 243 65430 65430 ($FF96) TKSA (60871, $EDC7) send secondary d-dd^sss dft^i* TAT .I'C 65433 ($FF99) MEMTOP (65061, $FE25) read/set top of memory pointer 65436 ($FF9C) MEMBOT (65076, $FE34) read/set bottom of memory pointer 65439 ($FF9F) SCNKEY (60039, $EA87) scan the keyboard 65442 ($FFA2) SETTMO (65057, $FE21) set time-out flag for IEEE bus 65445 ($FFA5) ACPTR (60947, $EE13) input byte from serial bus 65448 ($FFA8) CIOUT (60893, $EDDD) output byte to serial bus 65451 ($FFAB) UNTLK (60911, $EDEF) command serial bus device to UNTALK 65454 ($FFAE) UNLSN (60926, $EDFE) command serial bus device to UNLISTEN 65457 ($FFB1) LISTEN (60684, $ED0C) command serial bus device to LISTEN 65460 ($FFB4) TALK (60681, $ED09) command serial bus device to TALK 65463 ($FFB7) READST (65031, $FE07) read I/O status word 65466 ($FFBA) SETLFS (65024, $FE00) set logical file parameters 65469 ($FFBD) SETNAM (65017, $FDF9) set filename parameters 65472 ($FFC0) OPEN (VIA 794 ($31A) TO 62282, $F34A) open a logical file 65475 ($FFC3) CLOSE (VIA 796 ($31C) TO 62097, $F291) close a logical file 65478 ($FFC6) CHKIN (VIA 798 ($31E) TO 61966, $F20E) define an input channel 65481 ($FFC9) CHKOUT (VIA 800 ($320) TO 62032, $F250) define an output channel 65484 ($FFCC) CLRCHN (VIA 802 ($322) TO 62259, $F333) restore default devices 65487 ($FFCF) CHRIN (VIA 804 ($324) TO 61783, $F157) input a character 65490 ($FFD2) CHROUT (VIA 806 ($326) TO 61898, $F1CA) output a character 244 n n 65534 ( \ n I i 65493 ($FFD5) LOAD (62622, $F49E THROUGH 816, $330) load from a device 65496 ($FFD8) SAVE (62941, $F5DD THROUGH 818, $332) save to a device 65499 (SFFDB) SETTIM (63204, $F6E4) set the software clock 65502 ($FFDE) RDTIM (63197, $F6DD) read the software clock 65505 (SFFEl) STOP (VIA 808 ($328) TO 63213, $F6ED) check the STOP key 65508 ($FFE4) GETIN (VIA 810 ($32A) TO 61758, $F13E) get a character 65511 ($FFE7) CLALL (VIA 812 ($32C) TO 62255, $F32F) close all files 65514 ($FFEA) UDTIM (63131, $F69B) update the software clock 65517 ($FFED) SCREEN (58629, $E505) read r^umber of screeri rows and columns 65520 ($FFFO) PLOT (58634, $E50A) read/set position of cursor on screen 65523 ($FFF3) lOBASE (58624, $E500) read base address of I/O devices Location Range: 65530-65535 ($FFFA$FFFF) 6510 Hardware Vectors The last six locations in memory are reserved by the 6510 processor chip for three fixed vectors. These vectors let the chip know at what address to start executing machine language program code when an NMI interrupt occurs, when the computer is turned on, or when an IRQ interrupt or BRK occurs. 65530 $FFFA Non-Maskable Interrupt Hardware Vector This vector points to the main NMI routine at 65091 ($FE43). 65532 $FFFC System Reset (RES) Hardware Vector This vector points to the power-on routine at 64738 ($FCE2). 65534 $FFFE Maskable Interrupt Request and Break Hardware Vectors This vector points to the main IRQ handler routine at 65352 ($FF48). 245 diaptez 8 GEOS In addition to the standard operating system Kemal in ROM, a new, entirely separate operating system is available for the Commodore 64. This operating system is called GEOS, which stands for Graphics Environment Operating System. A disk-based program, GEOS can be used on any 64 with a disk drive. The newest model of the Commodore 64, the 64C, comes With a GEOS disk. From the user's standpoint, GEOS provides a friendly new operating environment, featuring pull-down menus, icons, multiple text fonts, dialog boxes, a screen pointer that can be driven by mouse or joystick, support for a variety of printers, a desktop-type disk management system, and a disk speedup system. For programmers, GEOS offers a rich set of standardized routines that allow them to incorporate all of the features listed above into their own programs, as well as providing a complete library of bitmapped graphics, math, string-handling, and fast disk I/O routines. Not only does GEOS offer routines that a program may call the way it does the standard ROM Kemal routines; it offers a framework in which to use these routines as well. Programming a GEOS application is very different from what the 64 programmer has come to expect. If a programmer isn't using GEOS, he or she is responsible for organizing the entire program structure: figuring out how to get the input from the user, and what to do when that input is received; figuring out the timing of each action, and where each part of the program fits in with every other part. But vwth GEOS, a substantial part of the application's structure is already provided for the programmer. When GEOS loads and runs a program, it calls the program's initialization routine (which is always at memory location 1024 ($400) ). After the program has initialized, execution returns once more to GEOS. At that point, the only programs that are rurming are the GEOS Main Loop and the GEOS Interrupt Handler. The GEOS interrupt code replaces the normal 64 Kemal IRQ handler which updates the software clock, flashes the cursor, and checks the keyboard for input (see the entries for location 59953 ($EA31) on pages 219-20 and location 788-789 ($314-$315) on page 73). Like the 64 Interrupt Handler, this code interrupts the normal program every 1 /60 second in order to take care of housekeeping chores (although GEOS uses raster interrupts to initiate the 249 interrupt routines, instead of the timer interrupts used by the old 64 operating system). The GEOS version of the handler checks the keyboard and buffers its input, checks the mouse input device for movement and/or button presses, decrements the process timers (more about them later), and moves the mouse pointer and sprites. It also sets system flags that tell the Main Loop whether or not there has been any input. By checking the input information that it receives from the Interrupt Handler, the Main Loop can do its job, which is to determine if any significant events have occurred, and to dispatch the code to handle those events if necessary. For example, if it finds that the mouse button has been clicked, it checks to see if the mouse was positioned over an icon, a menu bar, or a menu item. If it is positioned in such a spot when the button is pressed, an event has occurred — either an icon has been selected, a menu has been opened, or a menu item has been selected. For any of these events, the Main Loop calls a user-supplied subroutine that performs whatever action should be taken when tHe icon or menu item is selected. If the mouse button is not over an icon or menu, the Main Loop calls a user-supplied routine that handles an otherwise insignificant mouse button click. In the same way, the Main Loop calls user-supplied routines when other significant events happen, such as a key being pressed on the keyboard, or a process timer counting down to zero. This allows the progranuner to create what is called an event-driven application. Most programs are structured so that they wait for the user to give them some input, and then react to that input. GEOS takes over the jobs of looking for the input and interpreting what it means. As a result, all the programmer has to do is to write the initiaUzation code that sets up menus, or icons, or processes, and the service routines that respond when GEOS has determined that the icon or menu has been selected. Although for many applications, this event-driven scheme will be sufficient, there are some cases where the programmer will want to insert code into either the Main Loop or Interrupt Handler. GEOS provides hooks for those cases. If you want a routine to be executed before the regular interrupt code, all you have to do is place the address of that routine at the location named interruptTopVector, and end the routine by jumping through the old vector that was stored there. If you want to insert a routine that executes after the regular interrupt handler, you can place the address of that routine at the location named interruptBottomVector. And if you have a subroutine that you want to run as part of the Main Loop, all you have to do is to store its address in the location labeled applicationMain. For tasks that must be performed periodically, according to a fixed schedule, GEOS provides time-based processes. These are sub250 routines which the user can specify to be run after a certain number of interrupts have elapsed. They are set up just by placing the addresses of each subroutine in a table, along with a number indicating how many interrupts to wait before calling that subroutine. Each time the process timer counts down to zero, the subroutine will execute, and the timer will be reset to start the process all over again. GEOS also provides a way to suspend process execution. The Price of GEOS There is, of course, a price for all of the additional features that GEOS offers. For one thing, GEOS is a RAM-based operating system. Once it is loaded from the disk, it resides in an area of memory that under the old 64 operating system would be available for program code and/or data. GEOSredaces the sting of this somewhat by placing most of its code in the less accessible areas of the 64 — the RAM that is addressed at the same locations as the BASIC and Kemal ROMs, and 1/0 space. And, the provision of disk turbo routines makes it easier to use program overlays, a scheme whereby the program brings in additional routines from disk files as they are needed. But still, less than 24K of free RAM remains reserved exclusively for the use of application programs under GEOS. Another potential problem area is compatibility with older 64 software. It's highly unlikely that pre- G'£C5 software will confine itself to the area that GEOS allocates for application programs. This means that such programs are likely to use some or all of the RAM occupied by GEOS. GEOS does its best to accommodate such programs. It provides an Old €64 icon on the deskTop with the name of the file printed underneath for each file on a non-G£'05disk. When the user double-clicks on that icon, GEOS checks the load address and file size of the program. If the program does not extend past location 32768 ($8000) in memory, GfOJuses its disk hirbo fast load routines to load the program. GEOS also does its best to automatically run the program once it is loaded. But since non-G£'05 programs make no provisions for returning to the deskTop, and are Ukely to overwrite GEOS RAM, making such a return impossible, the only way to get back to GEOS after running an old 64 application is to reboot the system disk. GEOS\s, structured so that to a large extent, the programmer need not be concerned with the details of how every routine works internally. The programmer should not rely on the absolute addresses of system routines except as entered in the jump table, since GEOS is not fixed in ROM, and is therefore subject to change. In fact, in the first few months since its introduction, revisions have already been made. So the following memory map is presented with a caution: Do not rely absolutely on the addresses shown. Although they seem to be correct for the current version (1.2) of GEOS, Berkeley 251 2 GEOS Softworks has stated that they are likely to change in future versions. For example, it is quite probable that additions will be made to the system jump table at location 49408 ($C100). Keeping this warning in mind, however, you should still find the GEOS memory map included in this volume worthwhile. While some of the locations discussed below may change, the GEOS programnung principles presented in the discussion of those locations should prove helpful no matter what version of GEOS you are using. System Hardware Configuration Since the 64 hardware can be configured to use RAM and ROM memory in several different ways, it's useful to describe the particular configuration used by GEOS. Most of the time, GEOS sets location 1 to a value of 48 ($30). This sets up a system with 64K of RAM, instead of the default configuration of 8K BASIC ROM, 8K Kemal ROM, 4K I/O registers, ajid 44K RAM. Location 56576 ($DDOO) determines which of the four 16K banks of memory the VIC II display chip will address. GEOS sets this location to select bank 2, at 32768-49151 ($8000-$BFFF). Location 53272 ($D018) determines where the character ROM and the screen memory used by GEOS' bitmapped display will be located. The default value used by GEOS is 132, which sets the video display RAM to the 8000-byte area starting with location 40960 ($A000), and the Character Dot Data area to 36864 ($9000), where it will not interfere with the bitmapped display. GEOS Memory Map Location Range: 2-127 ($2-$7F) GEOS zero page Under GEOS, this portion of memory is used for GEOS zero-page variables, rather than for BASIC zero-page storage as in the normal 64 configuration. Location Range: 2-33 ($2-$21) Fseudoregisters r0-rl5 Since the 6502 has only three eight-bit registers for the programmer to use, the GEOS system uses part of zero-page memory to create a number of pseudoregisters. Though these registers don't have the versatility and speed of real registers, they perform many of the same functions. GEOS uses them to pass arguments between system routines, and for general temporary storage; Since these locations are used both by interrupt-level code and the Main Loop, their contents are saved at the beginning of the Interrupt Handler routine, and restored when the routine returns from the interrupt. 252 2-3 $2-$3 rO 4-5 $4-$5 rl 6-7 $6-$7 r2 8-9 $8-$9 rS 10-11 $A-$B r4 12-13 $C-$D r5 14-15 $E-$F r6 16-17 $10-$11 r7 18-19 $12-$13 r8 20-21 $14-$15 r9 22-23 $16-$17 rlO 24-25 $18-$19 rll 26-27 $1A-$1B rl2 28-29 $1C-$1D rl3 30-31 $1E-$1F rl4 32-33 $20-$21 rl5 34-35 $22-$23 currentPattern Pointer to the current pattern used by graphics fill routines 36-37 $24-$25 string Used for string input 38 $26 baselineOffset The offset from the top line of each character in the current character set to the baseline 39-40 $27-$28 cunentSetWidth The width of each character card in the current character set in pixels 41 $29 cunentHelght The height of each character card in the current character set in pixels 42-43 $2A-$2B currentlndexTable Size of each character card in bytes 44-45 $2C-$2D cardDotaPolnter A pointer to the location where the actual graphics data for the character is stored 46 $2E cunentMode This location is used to store a flag indicating the current characterdrawing mode. Bit 7 is used to indicate whether or not the character is to be underlined. If bit 7 is set to 1, the character is underlined. 253 47 GEOS and if it is reset to 0, the character is not underlined. Likewise, bit 6 is set if the character is to be in italics, while a 0 in this bit position means that italics will not be used. Bit 5 is set to 1 if the character is to be drawn in reverse video, or to 0 if the character is to be drawn normally. 47 $2F disployBufferOn The GEOS graphics systems allow graphics operations to draw images on the the visible foreground saeen, whose data is stored starting at location 40960 ($A000), or on an invisible backgroxmd screen, whose data area starts at 24576 ($6000). The variable storage location named displayBufferOn is used by the programmer to indicate whether he or she wishes GEOS graphics operations to draw to the foreground screen, the background screen, or both. By setting bit 7 to 1, the programmer indicates that subsequent calls to the graphics routines are to write to the foreground screen. By setting bit 6 to 1, the programmer indicates that the graphics should be drawn on the background screen. Both bits may be set at once, in which case graphics operations will affect both foreground and background screens. 48 $30 mouseOn This location is used for flags that indicate whether the mouse pointer, menus, and/or icons are currently in use. Bit 7 is set to 1 if the mouse pointer is on, and reset to 0 if it is not. Bit 6 is set to 1 if menus are on, and to 0 if they are not. Bit 5 is set to 1 if icons are on, and to 0 if they are not. 49-50 $31-$32 mousePicture This location holds a pointer to the memory area where the mouse pointer graphics data is stored. 51 $33 wlndowTop This variable is used for text clipping. It indicates the top screen line on which characters may be drawn. Any part of a character that appears above this line is clipped, and will not be drawn. 52 $34 wlndowBottom The bottom line of the window for purposes of text clipping 53-54 $35-$36 leftMargin The leftmost pixel of the window for purposes of text clipping The carriage-return character sends the cursor back to this point. 254 GEOS 61-62 \ 55-56 $37-$38 rightMargln The rightmost pixel to which text characters may be written If a text string crosses this point, the routine pointed to by / i StringFaultVector is called. 57 $39 pressFlag J~| This location is used for a flag indicating whether the last keypress was a new key, or a repeat of the previous keypress. Bit 7 is set to 1 if the keypress was a new one, and reset to 0 if it was a repeat. Bits 6 and 5 are used in similar fashion to designate whether disk data (bit 6) or mouse button data (bit 5) is new. There is also a bit that indicates whether the device-specific information in inputData is new. 58-59 $3A-$3B mouseXPositlon The current horizontal screen position (0-319) of the mouse pointer 60 $3C mouseYPosition The current vertical position (0-199) of the mouse pointer 61-62 $3D-$3E returnAddress Several of the GEOS routines have Mine versions. This means that the data that must be passed to these routines is imbedded in the code immediately following the JSR instruction. Since these routines must return to a point several bytes in advance of the normal return address, this location is used by those inline routines to designate the correct return address. Location Range: 251-255 ($FB-$FF) GEOS user zero-page RAM GEOS leaves these four zero-page locations free for use by the application, as is the case with the normal 64 configuration. GEOS assigns 1—1 locations 251-252 ($FB-$FC) the pseudoregister name aO, and loca/ '\ tions 253-254 ($FD-$FE) the name al. Location Range: 1024-24575 ($400-$5FFF) * 1 APPLICATION-RAM GEOS application program and data storage ^ This block of memory represents most of the free RAM that GEOS j \ leaves for application programs. When GfOS loads an application, it expects that the program's initialization code (or a JMP instruction to that code) will be located at address 1024 ($400). This initialization r~| code should set up the screen graphics, the menus, and the icons, as ' well as processes and user vectors (see location range 33946-33981, $849A-$84BD) if necessary. 255 24576 GEOS Although the program area left for GEOS applications is somewhat limited, you may find that the disk turbo routines compensate for this to some degree by allowing you to quickly swap portions of data or program code that are stored on disk in and out of the application memory area. Location Range: 24576-32575 ($6000$7F3F) BACK_SCREEN_BASE Background Screen Besides the normal screen display data area at 40960 ($A000), GEOS also sets aside this 8000-byte area as a second, background screen data area. This screen buffer is used by the system as a storage area for saving application images before they are overwritten by the system's menus or dialog boxes. There are a number of GEOS graphics routines that make it easy to move blocks of image data between the foreground and background screen areas, and these routines are used to recover portions of the screen that are overwritten. Plus, the user can take advantage of the background saeen area, using it for an undo buffer. There are also routines that support moving objects from one screen to the other, and these can be used to aid animation. GEOS uses the contents of location displayBufferOn as a flag which determines whether drawing operations affect the foreground screen only, the background screen only, or both. If you do not display menus or dialog boxes in your program, you may turn off the graphics buffer and use this area for additional storage or code space. For the details on the use of displayBufferOn, see location 47 ($2F). Location Range: 30976-32575 ($7900$7F3F) PRINTBASE Load address for printer drivers The bottom part of the background screen buffer area can also be used to store the printer driver software. This is the program that allows an application to print out a copy of the bitmapped screen using a dot-matrix printer. Since GEOS stores all text as bitmapped graphics, character-only models such as daisywheel printers are not suitable for use with GEOS programs unless the application itself undertakes to support such printers. GEOS comes with a wide assortment of printer drivers that support Commodore's serial printers, such as the Commodore 801 and 1000 printers, as well as many popular parallel printers, such as Epson and Epson compatibles. Star SG-10, Okidata 92, and the C. Itoh Prowriter. In addition, it is possible for the programmer to write printer driver code for other printers. The basic requirements are that drivers 256 GEOS 30982 / 1 I \ must load in at location 30976 ($7900) and must be no more than 1792 bytes long. The application must allocate a 640-byte print .. buffer, to which it sends data to be printed, as well as a 640-byte work area which the printer driver uses to assemble the data into the format in which the printer wants it. Printer drivers must support several functions, each of which may be entered by a jump table which is located at the beginning of the driver. This jump table is organized like the 64 Kemal jump table (see locations 65409-65525, pages 243-45), with each entry consisting of the single-byte 6510 JMP opcode followed by the two-byte address of the routine. The functions themselves are explained below. 30976 $7900 InltForPrint This routine gives the printer driver the opportunity to pass to the printer any special setup codes that might be required before starting to print. If the printer does not require any such codes, this routine does nothing except return control to the calling routine. 30979 $7903 StartPrint StartPrint opens the printer device using the Commodore Kemal routines, and sends the codes necessary to put the printer into graphics mode. It first calls the GEOS SetDevice to let it know that file printer (device number 4) is being used. Next, the GEOS InitForlO routine is called to disable interrupts and bank in the Kemal ROM and I/O space in place of the RAM where the GEOS code resides. From then on, the normal 64 Kemal routines are used to open the printer device, and send it the codes to put the printer into graphics mode. Finally, the GEOS DoneWithIO routine is called to enable intermpts and bank out the I/O space and Kemal ROM. 30982 $7906 PrlntBuffer PrintBuffer actually does the printing. Before calling the routine, the application must put the data for one row of 80 cards into the print buffer pointed to by rO, and must pass the address of a 640-byte workspace in rl, whose location remains constant between caUs to PrintBuffer. Note that the print buffer has space for a print row 80 cards wide, which means ttiat it can hold up to 640 pixels across. Since this is twice as wide as the actual 64 screen itself, it is possible to print pictures that are larger than the physical screen (geoPaint can create such pictures, for example). Since each row must be 80 cards wide, it is up to the application to pad the beginning or end of the line with blanks if there is not enough screen data to fill up the buffer. The Print Buffer routine takes the data in the buffer, converts it to a format that the printer can use, and sends as much of it to the 257 printer as the printer can fit on the page (see GetDinaensions, below). The routines used to send this data to the printer are much the same as the ones used by StartPrint, above: SetDevice; InitForlO; then the Kemal routines to Listen the printer, send it data, and Unlisten it; followed by DoneWithlO. 30985 $7909 StopPrlnt StopPrint is called at the end of the page to send a form-feed character to the printer, and to flush the work buffer. Before calling it, the application must put the address of the print buffer in rO, and tihe address of the work buffer in rl. 30988 $790C GetDlmensions This routine returns the number of cards of screen data that the printer can fit onto an 8 X 10.5-inch area of the paper, where a card is defined as a block eight pixels high and eight pixels wide. Upon return, the X register holds the maximum print width in cards, and the Y register holds the maximum print height in card rows. 30991 $790F Print ASCII This routine is used to send an ASCII character to the printer in text character mode, not graphics mode. Location Range: 32576-32767 ($7F40$7FFF) APPLICATION_VAR Application-free RAM The applications programmer may use the 192 bytes at the end of the background screen area as additional variable storage space. Location Range: 32768-35327 ($8000$89FF) OS_VARS GEOS Operating System RAM variable storage and work area This area includes space for disk buffers and storage of general information about disk operations, such as disk names, filenames, disk buffers, the number and types of drives available, and so on. It also includes the important vector table that is used to link the application code with the GEOS Main Loop and Interrupt Handler programs. Finally, there are a host of system variables used to maintain the mouse pointer, icon and menu selection imagery, the alarm clock, and other system information. 32768-33023 $8000-$80FF diskBIkBuf General disk block buffer 258 GEOS 33910-33928 ; \ 33024-33279 $8100-$81FF fileHeader Used to hold the header block for a GEOS file The header block contains the icon shape data information, the Commodore file tj^e, the GEOS file type, the starting and ending address data contained in the file, the initialization address, a permanent identifier, the author's name, and if the file is a data file, the name of the application file to which the data belongs. 33280-33535 $8200-$82FF curDirHeod Block containing directory header information for the disk in the currently selected drive 33536-33791 $8300-$83FF flleTrScTtib Buffer used to hold the track and sector chain for a file whose maximum size is 32,258 bytes. In order to save a file larger than this, use the partial-file read and write routines, and a special track and sector table of sufficient size. 33792-33821 $8400-$841D dlrEntryBuf Buffer used to build a file's directory entry 33822-33839 $841E-$842F DrACurDkNm Disk name of disk in drive A The first 16 characters are used for the name, the last 2 for the disk ID. 33840-33857 $8430-$8441 DrBCurDkNm Disk name of disk in drive B The first 16 characters are used for the name, the last 2 for the disk ID. 33858-33874 $8442-$8452 dcrtaFileName Name of the data file that is used to start an application This name is passed to the application. 33875-33892 $8453-$8464 dataDlskNamo The name of the disk on which the data file used to start the application is located 33893-33909 $8465-$8475 PmtFUename Name of the current printer driver The first 16 characters are used for the filename, the last character for a string terminator. 33910-33928 $8476-$8488 PrntDlskName The name of the disk on which the current printer driver is located The name of the disk is followed by a string terminator byte. 259 33929 GEOS 33929 $8489 curDrive The drive number (8-11) of the disk drive that is currently active 33930 $848A diskOpenFlg Flag used to indicate whether any files are currently open on a disk 33931 $848B IsGEOS Flag used to indicate whether or not the current disk is a GEOS disk 33932 $848C Interleave The BlkAlloc routine uses the value here as the desked interleave ■when selecting free blocks for a disk chain. GEOS sets this value to 8. 33933 $848D numDrives The number of drives recognized by GEOS 33934-33937 $848E-$8491 drlveType This block is reserved for flags showing the disk drive t5^es, but these flags are not yet implemented. This means the system does not yet distinguish between, say, a 1541 drive and a 1571 drive. 33938-33941 $8492-$8495 turboFlags This block is set aside for turbo flags for each of drives 8, 9, 10, and 11, though currently only the first two are actually used. These flags indicate whether the drives are currently in turbo mode or normal (slow) mode. Location Range: 33942-33946 ($8496$849A VLIR file data The GEOS system maintains a new t3rpe of disk file called VLIR (Variable Length Indexed Record), This type of file is similar to Commodore's relative files. 33942 $8496 curRecord The current record number for the open VLIR file 33943 $8497 usedRecords The number of records in the the open VLIR file 33944 $8498 flleWrltten This flag indicates whether or not the file has been written to since the last update of the index table and the Block Allocation Map (BAM). 260 I [ GEOS 33949-33950 / \ 33945-33946 $8499-$849A flleSize The current size (in blocks) of the VLIR file This value is stored in the directory entry of the file. Location Range: 33947-33982 ($849B$84BE) GEOS dispatch vector table This table contains the addresses of several important GEOS routines. During the course of its execution, GEOS will jump indirectly through these vectors in order to call the routines. If the value for an entry in the table is 0, however, GEOS will skip that call. In most cases, GEOS pushes the return address on the stack before making the jump, which means that the user should end these routines with an RTS instruction. The exception to this is interruptTop Vector, which points to the address interruptMain. If you wish to divert this vector to your own use, you should preserve the address of interruptMain somewhere first, and end your routine by jumping through that saved vector. 33947-33948 $849B-$849C applieationMaln The address of the application's own main loop subroutine If the appUcation inserts an address here during its initialization, the GEOS Main Loop will execute the subroutine at the end of each pass through the loop. The application's routine should end with an RTS instruction. 33949-33950 $849D-$849E IntenuptTopVectot Vector which holds the address of the main GEOS interrupt routine, interruptMain If you wish to perform some interrupt routine before GEOS reads the input devices and updates sprite positions, you must save the address found here and substitute the address of your own subroutine. You may, for example, wish to use other IRQ interrupts than the raster interrupt used by GEOS to check the keyboard and mouse. In such a case, the Interrupt Handler would have to check the source of each IRQ as soon it happened. This would allow the handler to determine whether the interrupt was caused by the GEOS raster IRQ and should result in the execution of the GEOS interrupt routine, or whether it was caused by the user's own interrupt, which should result in the execution of that interrupt routine. In order to execute the normal GEOS interrupt code at the end of the routine, you should jump to the address of interruptMain, which you have saved. 261 33951-33952 GEOS 33953-33954 $84A1-$84A2 mouseVector The address of the routine that is called when the mouse button is pressed 33955-33956 $84A3-$84A4 keyVector Vector which holds the address of the user-supplied routine to call when a key is pressed This routine can look in keyData (34063/$850F) to find the value of the key. This routine will not be run if the key is pressed when some other GEOS routine that handles keyboard input is already running. If you don't want to supply a routine to handle keypresses, you may leave this vector set to zero. If GEOS finds a zero here, it will not take any immediate action when a key is pressed, though it will still buffer the character in keyData. 33957-33958 $84A5-$84A6 InputVector The address of a user-supplied routine that the GEOS Main Loop calls when the input device bit of pressFlag is set, indicating a change in inputData 33959-33960 $84A7-$84A8 mouseFaultVector Vector which holds the address of the routine to call when the user tries to move the mouse pointer outside the boundaries set by mouseLeft, mouseRight, mouseTop, and mouseBottom 33961-33962 $84A9-$84AA otherPressVector The address of the user-supplied routine that is called when the mouse button is clicked and the mouse pointer is not positioned over a menu or an icon. If the user leaves this value set to zero, GEOS will ignore mouse button presses that do not activate menus or icons. 33963-33964 $84AB-$84AC StrlngFaultVector The address of the user-supplied routine that is called when the next character written by a routine like PutString or PutCharacter would be placed on the screen to the right of the value in rightMargin. This routine may advance the text to the next line after checking bottomMargin to make sure that the bottom of the page hasn't been U U 33951-33952 $849F-$84A0 interruptBoflomVector [J If you wish to perform some interrupt-level code after GEOS has checked the hardware and set its flags, put the address of that subroutine here. GEOS will execute the subroutine whose address is j / here at the end of its own interrupt routine, unless this vector is set ^ — ' to 0, in which case it skips right to the end of the interrupt. You should end your routine with an RTS instruction, not an RTI. 262 33976 / \ reached. Or, it can be used to implement fancier features like wordwrapping. / [ 33965-33966 $84AD-$84AE alarmTmtVector The address of the user-supplied routine that is called when the alarm clock timer counts down to zero. If the user leaves this value ^ set to zero, GEOS will do nothing when the alarm goes off. 33967-33968 $84AF-$84B0 BRKVector This vector points to the routine that is called when the BRK instruction is executed. The routine that normally is called is Paruc, which puts up a dialog box with the address of the BRK instruction, and allows the program to die with dignity. 33969-33970 $84B1-$84B2 RecoverVeetor The address of the routine which is called in order to recover the part of the screen that has been erased by menus or dialog boxes. 33971 $84B3 selectlonFlash This variable is used to determine the speed at which menu items and icons are flashed when selected. 33972 $84B4 alphaFlag This variable is used during string input to flag alphanumeric characters. 33973 $84B5 iconSelFlag Bits 6 and 7 of this flag are used to indicate how GEOS should highlight an icon that is selected. If no bits are set, the icon is not highlighted, and the service routine is called immediately. If bit 6 (the ST_FLASH flag) is set, the icon is flashed at the rate specified by selectionFlash, above. If bit 7 (the ST_INVERT flag) is set, the icon's image is inverted when the service routine is called. If both bits are set, the ST_FLASH flag takes precedence, and the icon is flashed, but not inverted. 33974 $84B6 fauUDota Flags used to detennine the current mouse faults 33975 $84B7 menuNumber The number of the active menu 33976 $84B8 mouseTop The top position to which the mouse pointer may travel 263

---
