# Memory Page 164

nome: OMERR
descrizione: OUT OF MEMORY Error Handler This routine just sets the error message code, and falls through to the general error handler. U U t I 4 1 829-4 1 865 $ A365-$ A389 Miscellaneous Messages The text of some of the other messages that BASIC can give you is stored here. This text includes cursor movement characters, and each j j message ends with a 0 character. The messages are: ^ 1) Carriage return, OK, carriage return 2) Space, space, ERROR I ( 3) Space, IN, space ^ 4) Carriage return, linefeed, READY., carriage return, linefeed 5) Carriage return, linefeed, BREAK 4 1 866-4 1911 $ A38A-$ A3B7 FNDFOR Find FOR on Stack This routine searches the stack for the blocks of data entries which are stored by each FOR command. For more information on the data that FOR places on the stack, see location 256 ($100). 41912 $A3B8 BLTU Open a Space in Memory for a New Program Line or Variable When a new nonarray variable is being created, or when a BASIC program line is being added or replaced, this routine is used to make room for the addition. It first checks to see if space is available, and then moves the program text and/or variables to make room. 41979-41991 $A3FB-$A407 GETSTK Check for Space on Stack Before undertaking an operation that requires stack space, this routine is used to check if there is enough room on the stack. If there is not, an OUT OF MEMORY error is issued. ( A 41992-42036 $A408-$A434 REASON Check for Space in Memory This is the subroutine that checks to see if there is enough space in free memory for proposed additions such as new lines of program text. If not, it calls for garbage collection, and if this still does not j j produce enough space, an OUT OF MEMORY error is issued. i I 94
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 42037-42088
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A435-$A468
man: Page 108

---

nome: ERROR
descrizione: General Error Handler The error number is passed to this routine in the .X register, and it displays the appropriate error message. Since this routine is vectored through RAM at 768 ($300), you can divert this vector to the address of your own routine, which would allow error trapping, or the addition of new commands. 42089-42099 $A469-$A473 Display ERROR or Other Message This portion of the routine tacks on the word ERROR to the message. This entry point is also used to print BREAK. 42100-42111 $A474-$A47F READY Print READY This routine displays the word READY, sets the Kernal message flag to show that direct mode is operative, and falls through to the main BASIC loop. 42 1 1 2-42 1 39 $ A480-$ A49B MAIN Main Loop, Receives Input and Executes Immediately or Stores as Program Line This is the main BASIC program loop. It" jumps through the RAM vector at 770 ($302), so this routine can be diverted. The routine gets a line of input from the keyboard, and checks for a line number. If there is a line number, the program branches to the routine that stores a line of program text. If there is no line number, it branches to the routine that executes statements. 42140 $A49C MAINl Add or Replace a tine of Program Text This routine calls subroutines to get the line number, tokenize keywords, and then looks for a line with the same number. If it finds a line with the same number, the routine deletes that line by moving all higher program text and variables down to where it started. The new line is then added. Since the CLR routine is called, the value of all current program variables is lost. 42291 $A533 LINKPRG Relink Lines of Tokenized Program Text Each line of program text starts with a pointer to the address of the next line (link address). This routine scans each line to the end (which is marked with a 0), and calculates the new link address by adding the offset to the address of the current statement. 95
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 42039-42088
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A437-$A468
man: Page 109

---
