# Memory Page 193

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: PutString Prints a string of characters that ends with a zero byte, the address of which is pointed to by rO, at position rll, rlH. Besides the normal printing ASCII characters, PutString supports a number of nonprinting command characters as well: FUNCTION Erase last character (only once in a row) Advance one space Move down one character Move to upper left comer Move up one character Move to left margin and down a character Turn underlining on Turn underlining off Turn reverse video on Turn reverse video off Move to the horizontal position specified by the two data bytes that appear after this character Move to the vertical position specified by the data byte that appears after this character Move to the horizontal position specified by the two data bytes that appear after this character, and to the vertical position specified by the data byte after that Ignore next three bytes (can't change font) Turn bold print on Turn italic print on Restore plain text Command BACKSPACE FORWARDSPACE LINE FEED HOME UPLINE CR (RETURN) UNDERLINEON UNDERLINEOFF REVERSEON REVERSEOFF GOTOX GOTOY ASCII 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 18 19 20 21 GOTOXY NEWCARDSET BOLDON ITALICON PLAINTEXT 22 23 24 25 25 49483 $C14B UseSystemFont Routine which instructs GEOS to use the resident system font, BSW-9 Mouse and Menus 49486 $C14E StartMouseMode starts the mouse functioning by activating mouseVector and calling InitMouse
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49480
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C148
man: If the carry flag is set when this routine is called, slowMouse is called, and the x and y positions of the mouse pointer are set to the values in rll and the Y register, respectively. 273 49489 GEOS 49489 $C151 DoMenu Used to display and activate the menu structure whose menu definition table is pointed to by rO The cursor is placed on the menu item specified by the accumulator. If an application program uses menus (and GEOS expects that it will), the program initialization code at 1024 ($400) should contain a call to DoMenu. The key to setting up a menu is constructing the menu definition table. This is a data structure that fully describes the way that the menu should be drawn and the action to be taken when a menu item is selected with the mouse. Each menu starts with a seven-byte header that is laid out as follows: .byte TOP ;y coordinate of top of menu box .byte BOTTOM ;y coordinate of bottom of menu box .word LEFT ;jr coordinate of left side of menu box .word RIGHT ;jr coordinate of right side of menu box .byte MENU-TYPE ORed with NUMBER_OF_ITEMS The first six bytes specify the size of the box that is drawn around the menu. If the menu is a horizontal one (like the menu bar at the top of the screen), GEOS draws one long horizontal menu box and prints all of the menu items on the same line, separating each of them with a vertical bar character. The top of the menu box should be placed near the top of the screen, and the bottom should be placed 14 pixels lower to allow for one row of text using the standard character set. The left and right margins depend on how many menu titles are included, but you should be sure to leave enough room for all of the text. If the menu is a vertical one (like the ones that drop down from the top menu bars), you should place the top vertical coordinate on the same line as the bottom row of the menu title bar, and place the bottom vertical coordinate so that there are 14 pixels of height for each item on the menu, plus 1 additional pixel. The left and right sides should be chosen to allow room for the menu items whose text is longest. The last byte in the header is a flag made up of two parts. The first part specifies the orientation of the menu, and whether or not the mouse pointer is to be constrained to the area of the menu. If this byte has bit 8 set (indicated by a value of 128/$80), the menu orientation is vertical. If bit 8 is not set, the menu is a horizontal one, like the menu title bar that appears at the top of the screen. If bit 7 is set (indicated by a value of 64/$40), the mouse pointer will be constrained to the area of the menu, so that it can't "fall off," causing the menu box to disappear. Tiiis is helpful for long menus, or sub-submenus where it is easy for the mouse pointer to move off of the menu and cause the menu to vanish. If this bit is not set, the pointer will not be constrained. 274 GEOS 49492 The second part of the flag indicates how many items there are in the menu. The number of menu items is ORed with the orientation and constraint bits to produce a single number. In addition to the menu header, the definition table must have entries for each of the items that appear on the menu. The entry for each menu item consists of five bytes arranged this way: .word TEXTPOINTER ;address of the text string for this item .byte ITEM—TYPE ;flag for submenu or subroutine .word ACTION-POINTER ;address of submenu or subroutine The first two bytes give the address of the text string that will be printed out for this particular menu item. The address is given in lowbyte, high-byte order as usual. The text string consists of a group of ASCII characters ending with a zero byte. The next byte is a flag that indicates whether this menu selection causes some subroutine to be executed, unrolls yet another menu, or both. If bit 8 is set (with a value of 128/$80), the item is of the type SUB-MENU, which indicates that choosing this item opens up another menu. If bit 7 is set (with a value of 64/$40), the item is of type DYNAMIC_SUB_MENU. This means that choosing this item first executes a subroutine, and then opens the menu whose address the subroutine leaves in rO. Finally, if this flag is set to 0, the item is of type MENU-ACTION, which means that a subroutine will be executed when the menu item is chosen. The final two bytes of the item entry also comprise an address in low-byte, high-byte order. What this address signifies depends on the type of menu item selected. If the item type is SUB— MENU, this address should point to another menu definition table that has been set up for that submenu. The menu definition table for submenus follows exactly the same format as that of the top menu, and you can link any number of horizontal and vertical menus, so that the main menu opens a submenu that opens a sub-submenu, and so on. If the item type is MENU-ACTION, the address should point to the beginning of a subroutine that will be executed when this menu item is chosen. This subroutine performs whatever action the menu selection indicates. It should include a call to a GEOS function to handle the disposition of the menu that called it (such as GotoFirstMenu), either erasing the menu or reactivating it for further selections. If the menu type is DYNAMIC— SUB_MENU, this address will also point to the beginning of a subroutine. The difference here is that after the subroutine is finished, a submenu will also be displayed. The user's subroutine must leave a pointer to the submenu in rO when it is finished. 49492 $C154 RecoverMenu 275 49495 GEOS 49495 $C157 RecoverAlIMenus 49498 $C15A Dolcons Used to display and activate the icons whose definition table is pointed to by rO. From then on, when the user clicks on one of those icons, the subroutine specified in the table entry for that icon will be executed. The icon definition table is the data structure used to supply GEOS with all of the information it needs to know about the icon. The table starts with a four-byte header arranged as follows: .byte NUMBER_OF_ICONS ;The number of icon entries in the table .word MOUSE_X ;The horizontal position of the mouse .byte MOUSE_Y ;The vertical position of the mouse The first byte is used 'to indicate the number of icons that will be defined in the body of the table. The word and the byte following it specify the horizontal and vertical coordinates at which the mouse pointer will be positioned after the icons are first displayed. After the header come the entries for each individual icon. Each entry consists of eight bytes, arranged in the following manner: .word ICON_GRAPHICS_DATA ;Address of BitmapUp format image data .byte ICON_XPOSITION ;Horizontal position of top left comer .byte ICON_YPOSITION ;Vertical position of top left comer .byte ICON-WIDTH ;Image width in bytes .byte ICON-HEIGHT ;Image height in pbcels .word SUBROUTINE ;Address of subroutine to be executed The first two bytes form the address of the data for the graphics image that represents the icon. This data is laid out in a special format, the same one used by the GEOS routine BitmapUp. See the jump table entry for BitmapUp, 49474 ($C142), for the details of this format. Though this format allows you to compress the data to save storage space, if the graphics data is less than 92 bytes long, you can bypass the compaction scheme by starting your data area with a Count byte equal to 128 plus the number of data bytes. This Count byte is followed by the actual data bytes that make up the image. The next two bytes specify the coordinates for the top left comer of the image. Note that the horizontal position is specified in bytes rather than pixels, since each Bitmap Object starts on an even byte boundary. The two bytes after the position coordinates specify the width of the object (in bytes), and its height (in pixels). This infor276 □ n n n GEOS 49513 mation is used to translate the single long string of graphics data into a rectangular image. The first data byte is drawn at position ICON_XPOSITION, ICON_YPOSITION, and each subsequent data byte is drawn to the immediate rigjht of the previous one, until ICONWIDTH number of bytes have been drawn. After each row is completed, a new row is started directly below it, until ICON—HEIGHT number of rows have been drawn, at which point the image is com[ 1 pleted. The final two bytes in the icon entry give the address for the subroutine to execute when the icon is selected, in the normal lowbyte, high-byte format. All of the icons defined in the table vwll be active until another call to Dolcons substitutes a different icon table. The ordy way to get rid of icons completely is to erase the screen and use Dolcons to activate a table with only one icon, whose graphic image consists of one zero byte (making the picture invisible), and whose dispatch subroutine points to an RTS instruction (which means that the icon will do nothing if selected). GEOS expects that your application will be using at least one icon, so if you do not want to use any, make up this kind of null icon definition table. Utilities 49501 $C15D DShiftLeft Shifts the contents of the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the X register arithmetically to the left by the number of places indicated by the contents of the Y register. 49504 $0160 BBMult Multiplies the two bytes found in the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the X register, and stores the resulting word in the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the Y register. 49507 $0163 BMult Multiplies the byte found in the pseudoregister whose address is ' > passed in the Y register by the word found in the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the X register, and stores the result in the J— latter. 49510 $0166 DMult ■ Multiplies the word found in the pseudoregister whose address is {] passed in the Y register by the word found in the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the X register, and stores the result in the latter. n ' 49513 $0169 Ddiv Divides the word found in the pseudoregister whose address is n 277 49516 GEOS u passed in the X register by the word found in the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the Y register, and stores the result in the former. 49516 $C16C DSdlv Divides the signed word found in the pseudoregister pointed to by the X register by the signed word found in the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the Y register, and stores the result in the former. The remainder is stored in r8. 49519 $C16F Dabs Changes the contents of the word found in the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the X register to its twos complement absolute value. 49522 $C172 Dnegate Changes the contents of the word found in the pseudoregister pointed to by the X register to its twos complement negative value. 49525 $C175 Ddec Decrements the unsigned word found in the pseudoregister pointed to by the X register. 49528 $C178 ClearRam Sets to zero the number of bjrtes specified in rO, starting with the address pointed to by rl. 49531 $C17B FiURam Fills with the value in r2L the number of bytes specified in rO, starting with the address pointed to by rl. 49534 $C17E MoveDota Moves the number of bytes specified in r2 from the address pointed to by rO to the address pointed to by rl. The two areas may overlap. 49537 $0181 InitRam Initializes a block of RAM according to the Initialization Table pointed to by rO. This table may contain a number of entries, each of which consists of a word specifying a location in RAM, followed by a byte indicating the number of bytes to be placed at that location, followed by the actual data bytes to be placed there. An entry with a zero as its first word marks the end of l3\e table. 49540 $0184 PutDeclmal 278

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: GetRandom Generates the next pseudorandom number using the seed value found in the variable random (34058/$850A), where the result will also be stored.
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49543
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C187
man: The formula used is random = (seed + 1) * 2 MOD 65521. Other 49546 $C18A MouseUp Redraws the mouse pointer and enables the mouse after a call to MouseOff 49549 $C18D MouseOff Temporarily turns the mouse pointer off and disables the mouse 49552 $C190 DoPrevlousMenu Used by the applications menu dispatch routine when a menu item is selected When the user makes one selection, the current menu can be rolled up to prevent any further selections being made. DoPreviousMenu erases the current submenu and reenables the previous one (usually the horizontal menu title bar). 49555 $C193 ReDoMenu This is another routine that may be used by the applications menu dispatch routine when a menu item is selected. ReDoMenu reactivates the current menu after an item has been selected, thus allowing the user to make another selection from the same menu. 49558 $0196 GetSerialNumber 49561 $0199 Sleep Used to discontinue execution of a subroutine for the number of jiffies (each equal to 1/60 second) indicated in rO When Sleep is called, the subroutine is ended with an RTS instruction, but its address is remembered. When the designated time has passed, an interrupt resumes execution of the subroutine at the instruction following the JSR Sleep instruction. 49564 $0190 OlearMouseMode Turns off the mouse pointer, and disables the mouse, menus, and icons 279

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: L-Rectangle Draws a rectangle and fills it with the current fill pattern (set by SetPattem)
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49567
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C19F
man: The boundaries of the rectangle are specified by the data that follows immediately after the JSR instruction. The first two bytes give the coordinates for the top and bottom of the rectangle, and the two words which follow give the coordinates of the left and right sides. 49570 $C1A2 L-FrameRectangle Draws the outline of a rectangle which is one pixel wide, and conforms to the pattern set by the current fill pattern (set by SetPattern) The boundaries of the rectangle are specified by the data that follows immediately after the JSR instruction. The first two bytes give the coordinates for the top and bottom of the rectangle, and the two words which follow give the coordinates of the left and right sides. 49573 $C1A5 L-RecoverRectangle Moves a rectangle from the background screen to the foreground screen The boundaries of the rectangle are specified by the data that follows immediately after the JSR instruction. The first two bytes give the coordinates for the top and bottom of the rectangle, and the two words which follow give the coordinates of the left and right sides. 49576 $C1A8 i-GraphicsString This routine executes the string of graphics commands that is stored immediately after the JSR instruction. For an explanation of these commands, see GraphicsString, location 49462 ($C136). Background Generation 49579 $C1AB 1-BitmapUp Displays the compacted GEOS bitmap objects pointed to by the data word that follows the JSR instruction The next two bytes specify the horizontal byte boundary (0-39) and the scan line at which the display should begin. The final two data bytes indicate the width of the object in bytes and its height in scan lines. GEOS bitmap objects are laid out more like sprites than like the normal bitmap graphics. (For example, each data byte appears onscreen to the right of the previous one, rather than directly below it.) In addition, a compaction scheme called run-length encoding is used to reduce the size of the data. For more details concerning the format of G£'t75 bitmap objects, see the jump table entry for BitmapUp, location 49474 ($C142), above. 280 GEOS 49594 Character Manipulation 49582 $C1AE i_PutStrlng Prints a string of characters ending with a zero byte The horizontal position of the text appears as a data word that immediately follows the JSR calls, while the vertical position appears as the next byte. The string itself follows. This routine treats some nonprinting characters as commands. See PutString, location 49480 ($C148), for more information. 49585 $C1B1 GetRealSlze Returns the width, height, and baseline offset of the ASCII character passed in the accumulator, using the current font and the font style indicated by the X register. (The flags passed in this register are the same as those used in location currentMode; see location (46/$2E).) The width of the character is returned in the Y register, the height in the X register, and the distance from the top of the character to the baseline in the accumulator. Utilities 49588 $C1B4 i-FlURam Fills a number of bytes of RAM with a data character The number of bytes to fill appears in the first data word following the JSR call, followed by the word address of the RAM area to fill, and the byte value with which to fill the RAM. 49591 $C1B7 i_MoveData Moves a number of bytes from one memory area to another The address of the source area is contained in the word following the JSR instruction, the address of the destination is in the word following that, and the last data word holds the number of bytes to move. The source and destination areas may overlap. Routines Added Later 49594 $C1BA GetStrlng GetString accepts a string of up to r2L characters from the keyboard, terminated by a carriage return, and places that string in the buffer pointed to by rO. The input is echoed to the screen at the location specified in rll (horizontal) and rlH (vertical). Optionally, the user can set bit 7 of rlL to indicate that he or she has supplied a routine pointed to by r4 that handles the case in which the user tj^es more than the maximum number of characters. If this routine is not supplied, the system routine pointed to by stringFaultVector (33963/ $84AB) is called when too many characters are entered. 281 After the string has been gathered, the routine whose address is in keyVector (33955/$84A3) is caUed. 49597 $C1BD GotoFirstMenu Used to remove the submenu display and go back to the main menu Called by the application when a menu item is selected and no further selections are available. 49600 $C1C0 InitT^xtPrompt Creates an edit cursor which appears as a vertical bar whenever a string input routine like GetString is called The accumulator holds the height of the cursor bar (in pixels). Sprite number 1 is used for the cursor. 49603 $C1C3 MainLoop The GEOS Main Loop routine, which runs continuously and controls the execution of the application 49606 $C1C6 DrawSprlte Moves the 64-byte sprite shape data that starts with the address pointed to by r4 to the data area for the sprite whose number is inr3L Remember that sprite 0 is used for the mouse pointer, and sprite 1 is used for the text cursor. 49609 $C1C9 GetCharWldth This routine takes the ASCII character passed in the accumulator, and returns the width of that character in the currentFont and currentMode variables, and also in the accumulator. 49612 $C1CC LoadCharSet Instructs GEOS to begin using the font whose FontlnfoTab is pointed to by rO 49615 $C1CF PosSprlte Positions the sprite specified in r3L at horizontal position r4 and vertical position r5L Note that GEOS positions the sprites using screen coordinates, and not the sprite hardware coordinates which may correspond to positions that are offscreen. (See locations 53248-53264 ($D000-$D010) on pages 126-27 for more information about the hardware coordinates.) 49618 $C1D2 EnablSprite Turns on the sprite display bit for the sprite whose number is passed in r3L 282 n I 1 n GEOS 49624 49621 $C1D5 DisablSprite Turns off the sprite display bit for the sprite whose number is passed in r3L 49624 $C1D8 CallRoutine This routine is used at the Main Loop level to perform an indirect JSR to the routine. The high byte of the target routine is supplied in the X register, and the low byte in the accumulator. Disk and Miscellaneous Routines Since the GEOS disk filing system varies somewhat from the Commodore scheme, a short explanation of these differences is appropriate before we discuss the disk routines. The first difference between GEOS files and old 64 files is that GEOS alters the standard directory entry scheme somewhat. The directory entry is a data structure stored on the disk that holds important information that the filing system must know about a particular file, such as the filename, file tj^e, the beginning track and sector number, and so forth. GEOS takes the part of the directory entry ordinarily used by the Commodore DOS to store information about relative files (which aren't supported by GEOS) and stores special GEOS file information there. Bj^es 19-20, which ordinarily are used as a pointer to the first side sector of a relative file, are used to point to the track and sector of the file header block, a special GEOS file structure that is used to store icon image data and other important information. (More will be said about this header block later.) Byte 21 is used to store the GEOS structure type. GEOS supports two different file structure types: sequential and VLIR (Variable Length Indexed Record) files. Sequential files are laid out like the familiar Commodore sequential files. The structure of VLIR files will be discussed later. A value of 0 in byte 21 indicates a GEOS sequential file, and a value of 1 indicates a VLIR file. Byte 22 is used to store the GEOS file type. This is a number that specifies the function of the file. Possible values for file type include: Number File Type Description 0 NOT_GEOS Old 64 file without header 1 BASIC Old 64 BASIC program 2 ASSEMBLY Old 64 machine language program 3 DATA Old 64 data file 4 SYSTEM GEOS system me 5 DESK_ACC G£'05 desk accessory ! — , 6 APPLICATION G£'C>5 application / 1 7 APPL_DATA Data file for a GEOS application 8 FONT GEOS font me ( I 283 49624 esos U u Number File Type 9 PRINTER 10 INPUT-DEVICE 11 DISK-DEVICE Description GEOS printer driver GEOS input device driver GEOS disk device driver Finally, bytes 23-27 are used to store the date and time of file creation. One byte each is allocated to year, month, day, hour, and minute. The year value is an offset from the base year of 1900, so a value of 86 here refers to 1986, and a value of 101 refers to the year 2001. The time is stored in 24-hour military format, where 0 is used for midnight, 12 is used for noon, 13 is used for 1 p.m., and so on. In addition to these alterations in the directory entry for each file, the GEOS file system reserves an additional block of disk space for each file, called the file header block. This block contains even more information about the file, including the shape data for the icon used to represent the file on the deskTop. If you wish to add a custom icon to an old 64 program, you must manually alter the directory entry using a sector editor program, and then reserve a block in the BAM (Block Allocation Map) for the header block. The contents of this header block are as follows: .word 0, 255 .byte ICON-WIDTH .byte ICON-HEIGHT .byte ICON-SIZE + 128 .byte data, data ... .byte COMMODORE-HLE-TYPE .byte GEOS_nLE_TYPE .byte GEOS-STRUCTURE-TYPE .word StartAddress .word EndAddress .word InitAddress .byte 'permanent filename',0 .byte 'name of author',0 .byte 'name of parent file',0 Some of these deserve further explanation. For now, all icons are 3 bytes wide and 21 pixels high (just like a sprite). Therefore, ICON-WIDTH is always 3, ICON-HEIGHT is always 21, and ICON-SIZE + 128 always comes to 191. Bytes 5-67 contain the actual image data for the icon, laid out just as sprite data is in memory. The COMMODORE-FILE-TYPE is set to one of the normal 64 DOS file types, and is used to distinguish between program and data files. These file types include sequential, or SEQ, files (129); PRG, or program, files (130); and USR, or user, files (131). The GEOS_FILE_TYPE and GEOS_STRUCTURE_TYPE use the same values as those in the directory entry, as shown above. 284 ;track and sector pointer ;in bytes ;in pixels ;number of bytes of image data ;63 bytes of image data ;type OR $80 ;Application, system, data, and so on ;Sequential or VLIR ;starting memory address for file ;ending memory address for file ;address of initialization routine ;20-byte permanent filename ;20-byte author's name ;20-byte name of parent file \ i I I U L! 1 ' u 1 ( I I u GEOS 49627 The last three entries are each text strings up to 20 characters long, ending with a zero byte. The first is the permanent application name. You can use this space to store an application name which cannot be changed easily by the user, as the filename can. Checking the permanent name instead of the filename is therefore a more reliable test of what the file actually contains. When the GEOS file selector box is displayed in a dialog box, it is possible to specify that only certain files be displayed, based on the contents of the permanent filename. The next string contains a space for the author's name. The last string can be used to indicate the parent application for a data file — the program to which the data file belongs. In addition to sequential access files, GEOS also provides an indexed file type called VLIR (Variable Length Indexed Record) files. A VLIR file consists of 0-127 records. Each record can be any length up to 32K, with the stipulation that the application must have enough free RAM available to be able to load the entire record into memory at once. VLIR files may be used to store both programs and data. An example of their use for programs would be an application that is too large to store in RAM all at once. A main part of the program might reside in RAM at all times as a sort of traffic director, and load in other parts of the program as overlays when necessary. Each discrete program module might be stored as one record in a VLIR file. An example of data files that might require that parts be paged in and out is font files for the various text fonts. The directory entry for a sequential GEOS file contains a pointer to the track and sector numbers of the first block of the file. VLIR files use this pointer to specify the location of an Index Table. The Index Table is just an entire block of track and sector pointers, each of which points to the first block of a VLIR record. This block can hold 0-127 pairs of pointers. Each block of a VLIR record contains a pointer to the next block, so that the record is composed of a linked list of sectors, just like a normal sequential file. To create a VLIR file, use the SaveFile routine and pass an end address that has a value 1 less than the start address of the file. This creates an empty VLIR file. To add data, you use OpenRecordFile to open the file, and AppendRecord to add a record. C3nly one VLIR file may be open at a time. After you have added records, you may use AppendRecord, InsertRecord, or DeleteRecord to change the composition of the file. When you have finished adding records, use CloseRecordFile to close the file. 49627 $C1DB CalcBIksFree Calculates the number of blocks that are free on the disk whose directory header is pointed to by r5. 285 49630 u GSOS u 49630 $C1DE ChkDkGEOS U Checks to see if the disk in the current drive is a GEOS disk, and, if it is, sets the flag isGEOS to TRUE. ^ ^ 49633 $C1E1 NewDlsk ^ Loads the Block Availability Map (BAM) from the disk specified in curDrive (33929/$8489) into the internal RAM of the disk drive. | { This must be performed before files on the new disk may be read. ' — 49636 $C1E4 GetBlock Loads a chain of r2L blocks, starting with track rlL, sector rlH, into a buffer pointed to by r4. 49639 $C1E7 PutBlock Writes a block of RAM data (which includes track and sector information) pointed to by r4 to disk at track rlL, sector rlH. 49642 $C1EA SetGEOSDisk This routine writes the GEOS ID string to an imused portion of the RAM image of the directory header stored at curDirHead (3328033535/$8200-$82FF). 49645 $C1ED SaveFlle Saves the region of memory indicated by the file header block pointed to by r9 to a GEOS sequential disk file. The number of the directory page of the deskTop note pad in which to store the the file is passed in rlOL. (A zero can be used to indicate that the search for a free directory entry should begin with the first entry.) When this routine is being used to create a new, empty VLIR data file, the start address specified in the header block should be 0, and the ending address —1. When it is being used to create an empty VLIR program file, the start address should be the program load address, and the ending address should be 1 less than the start address. 49648 $C1F0 SetGDirEntry Creates a GEOS directory entry for a file according to the file header 1 j whose address is pointed to by r9. 49651 $C1F3 BldGDirEntry M Builds a GEOS directory entry in memory at location dirEntryBuf (33792-33821/$8400-$841D), using the information in the file header pointed to by r9. j j U 286 GEOS 49684 49654 $C1F6 GetFreeDlrBlk Locates a free directory entry on the note pad page indicated in rlOL, or on the closest following page if that page is full. 49657 $C1F9 WrIteFile Writes the data block whose address is pointed to by r7 from memory to disk using the table of free disk blocks pointed to by r6. 49660 $C1FC BlkAUoe Allocates blocks on disk for writing r2 number of bytes using the track and sector allocation table pointed to by r6. 49663 $C1FF ReadFlle 49666 $C202 SmallPutChav A fast, simplified version of PutChar (see 49477/$C145) that does not perform boundary checking, update the cursor position, or execute commands. 49669 $C205 FoUowChaln Builds a track/sector table in the buffer pointed to by r3, for the file starting at track rlL, sector rlH. 49672 $C208 GetFile Used to load the file whose name is contained in the zero-terminated text string pointed to by r6. If the file is an application or desk accessory, the program is run. 49675 $C20B FlndFlle This routine loads the directory entry for the file whose name is contained in the zero-terminated text string pointed to by r6. If it is found, its Directory Block will be diskBlkBuf (32768/$8000), and its Directory entry in dirEntryBuf (34048/$8500); otherwise an error code will be returned in the X register. 49678 $C20E CRC 49681 $C211 LdFile Loads a system file whose directory is pointed to by r9, and returns control to the caller without executing the program. 49684 $0214 EnterTurbo Makes the 1541 drive start executing the disk turbo program. If the turbo code is not yet stored in disk RAM, this routine moves it there. 287 49687 GEOS 49687 $C217 LdDeskAcc Loads the desk accessory file whose Directory Entry is pointed to by r9, and runs it. The appropriate portions of the current application are saved to disk so that it may be restored when the accessory exits. 49690 $C21A ReadBlock 49693 $C21D LdApplic Loads the application file whose Directory Entry is pointed to by r9, and runs it. 49696 $C220 WziteBlock 49699 $0223 VerWriteBlock 49702 $C226 FreeFUe 49705 $C229 GetFHdrlnfo Reads a data file of size r2, starting at track rlL, sector rlH, into memory at the address pointed to by r7. 49708 $C22C EnterDeskTop Reinitializes GEOS and loads and runs the deskTop program. Application programs should do a JMP here when they are finished. 49711 $C22F StaitAppl 49714 $C232 ExitTurbo This routine switches the 1541 disk drive back to using its own ROM operating system, rather than the turbo code stored in disk RAM. It leaves the turbo code in disk RAM, however, so that turbo mode may be easily entered again. 49717 $0235 PurgeTurbo Stops execution of the turbo code and marks the turboFlag for the current drive to indicate that the turbo code is no longer loaded in disk RAM. 49720 $0238 DeleteFlle Deletes the file whose name is contained in the zero-terminated string pointed to by rO. 49723 $023B FlndFTypes This routine is used to build a list of files that match the file type passed in r7L. File types include NOT_GEOS, BASIC, ASSEMBLY, DATA, SYSTEM, DESK_ACC, APPL_DATA, FONT, PRINTER, 288 n n n n n n GEOS 49747 INPUT_DEVICE, and DISK-DEVICE. It is also possible to limit data files to those created by a particular application, by passing a pointer to a permanent name string in rlO. The filenames, up to a maximum of r7L of them, will be placed in the user-supplied buffer pointed to by r6. 49726 $C23E RstrAppl After a desk accessory program has exited, this routine replaces the contents of memory so as to restore the application that was running when the desk accessory started. 49729 $C241 ToBasic Transfers control from GEOS to Commodore 64 BASIC. 49732 $C244 FastDelFile Used to quickly delete the file whose name is contained in the zeroterminated string pointed to by rO, when a list containing the track and sector number of every disk block used by the file is pointed to by r3. 49735 $C247 GetDirHead Reads the directory header from the current disk into the buffer at CurDirHead. 49738 $C24A PutDirHead Writes the directory header from curDirHead out to disk. 49741 $C24D NxtBlkAUoc Continues allocating blocks on disk for writing r2 number of bytes using the track and sector allocation table pointed to by r6 after BlkAUoc has allocated its maximum of 32,258 bytes. The last track and sector allocated by BlkAUoc is indicated by rS. 49744 $C250 ImprintRectangle Moves the rectangle bordered by r3,r2L to r4,r3H from the foreground screen to the backgroimd screen. 49747 $C253 l_ImprlntRectangle Moves a rectangle from the foreground screen to the background screen. The boundaries of the rectangle are specified by the data that follows immediately after the JSR instruction. The first two bytes give the coordinates for the top and bottom of the rectangle, and the two words which follow give the coordinates of the left and right sides. 289 49750 GEOS 49750 $C256 DoDlgBox Opens the dialog box whose definition table is pointed to by rO, saving the portion of the screen that the box overwrites and all system variables. This dialog box remains active until the dialog is exited with a call to RstrFrmDialog. A dialog box is a window that opens on top of the application screen, and temporarily takes control away from the application, forcing the user to take some action. When the user responds, the dialog is exited, and the application is restored. A dialog box can be used to display a message to the user, or to get text input, numeric input, or other types of instructions from the user. It can even provide a list of files to select from. The key to using a dialog box is in setting up the data table that defines its appearance and function. This table is made up of several parts, each of which can vary in length depending on how many entries you add. The first part of the table specifies the position of the dialog box, and the fill pattern used to draw the shadow box that outlines the dialog box below and to the right. The first byte is a flag that shows whether the position used is the standard GEOS position or a user-defined position. Possible values are 128/$80, indicating that ' the box will be placed according to GEOS defaults, and 0, indicating that the box will be placed at a user-defined location. To these values are added the number of the fUl pattern (0-33) used to shadow the box. If a user-defined position is specified, the next six bytes are used to define the top right and bottom left comers of the box: .byte TopY )yl (0-199) .byteBottomY ;y2 (0-199) .word LeftX ixl (0-319) .word RightX ;x2 (0-319) After the position specifier come icon blocks or command blocks. Icon blocks are used to put up icons. GEOS provides a number of system icons that are available to the programmer. These icons display various messages, and when the user clicks on one, the dialog box exits, returning the number of the icon selected in rOL. To include one of these icons in the dialog box, the programmer need only include an icon block in the definition table, in the following format: .byte ICON-NUMBER .byte XPosition ;in bytes — drawing starts on a byte .byte YPosition ;in pixels 290 The first value is the icon number. The system provides the following icons: Number Icon 1 OK 2 Cancel 3 Yes 4 No 5 OPEN 6 DISK 7-10 Reserved for future use The next two bytes give position offsets for the icon. These offsets show how far the icon should be placed from the upper left corner of the box. The horizontal offset is measured in bytes, while the vertical one is measured in pixels. In addition to icon blocks, your dialog box definition table may include one or more command blocks. These consist of a command number followed by some additional information needed to implement the command. These commands allow you to draw text, receive text from the user, or even set up a scrolling file-selection window. The eight defined commands are discussed below. After you have included all of the icon blocks and command blocks that you want in the dialog, use an entry of a single zero byte to signal the end of the dialog box definition table. DBTXSTR (11) displays a text string ending in a zero byte. The format for this command block is: .byte 11 ;command number .byte Xoffset ;horizontal offset from left of box ; (in bytes) .byte Yoffset ;vertical offset from top of box ; (in pixels) .word Text—Pointer ;address of the text string DBVARSTR (12) displays a variable text string ending in a zero byte. You can change the contents of the string by changing the contents of the pseudoregister used to point to it between calls to DoDlgBox. The format for this command block is: .byte 12 ;command number .bj^e Xoffset ;horizontal offset from left of box ; (in bytes) .byte Yoffset ;vertical offset from top of box ; (in pixels) .byte Register—Number ;number of pseudoregister that contains ; the address of the string 49750 aEOS DBGETSTRING (13) gets a string of ASCII characters from the user and places them into a text buffer. The string is displayed in the dialog box as the user types it in. The format for this command block is: .byte 13 ;command number .byte Xoffset ;horizontal offset from left of box ; (in bytes) .byte Yoffset ;vertical offset from top of box ; (in pixels) .byte Register—Number ;number of pseudoregister that contains ; the address of the buffer in which the ; the string will be stored .byte Maximum_Chars ;the maximum number of characters to be ; stored in the text buffer DBSYSOPV (14) causes any mouse button press that occurs when the pointer is not over an icon to force a return to the application. This command block requires no additional information, and consists only of the command number: .byte 14 ;command number DBGRPHSTR (15) causes a graphics string to be executed. This is a string of graphics drawing instructions like that used by the system routine GraphicsString (see location 49462/$C136 for more information). The format for this command block is: .byte 15 ;command number .word String—Pointer ;address of the graphics command string DBGETFILES (16) opens a file-selection window. This is a window on the left side of the dialog box that contains a list of all of the files that match the type specifications which are passed to the routine. If a permanent filename is specified in the conunand, only files whose own permanent filenames match the one specified will be displayed. Otherwise, all files will be displayed. If there are more names than can fit in the window, the user can see the rest of the names by pressing the scroll arrows that appear under the box. The format for this command block is: .byte 16 ;command number .byte Xoffset ;horizontal offset from left of box ; (in bytes) .byte Yoffset ;vertical offset from top of box ; (in pixels) In addition, several pieces of information are passed to this command in the zero-page pseudoregisters before DoDIgBox is called: 292 GSOS 49753 n n I I n n n r7L File—Tjrpe r5 Filename—Buffer rlO Permanent—Pointer ;GEOSme type (SYSTEM, DESk_ACC, and so on) pointer to address of buffer for storing filenames (up to maximum of 15) pointer to a string containing the permanent filename to which the display is restricted. For example, if the string reads geoPaint, only files with that permanent filename are listed. If this is set to 0, all files will be found. DBOFVEC (17) sets a user-defined OtherPressVector. This causes the execution of a user-supplied subroutine when a mouse button is pressed other than when the pointer is positioned over an icon. This routine may return to the dialog box code with an RTS, or exit the dialog with a JMP to RstrFrmDialog. The format for this command block is: .byte 17 .word UserVector ;command niunber ;address of OtherPress routine DBUSRICON (18) sets up a user-defined icon. This icon is defined by an icon table like that used by Dolcons (see location 49498/$C15A for more information about the structure of the entries in the icon definition table). The position bytes in the icon table should be set to zero, however, since the offset values in the command block will be used to position the icon. .byte 18 .word Icon_Table .byte Xoffset .byte Yoffset ;command number ;address of user icon definition table ;horizontal offset from left of box ; (in bytes) ;vertical offset from top of box ; (in pixels) DB_USR-ROUT (19) installs a user-supplied subroutine that will be executed as soon as the dialog box is drawn. This subroutine can be used for almost any purpose. It returns to the dialog box code with an RTS instruction. The format for this command block is: .byte 18 .word UserVector ;command number ;address of the user-supplied subroutine 49753 $C259 RenameFUe Renames the file whose old name is contained in the zero-terminated text string pointed to by r6 with the new name contained in the zero-terminated text string pointed to by rO. 293 49756 GEOS 49756 $C25C InltForlO Part of the GEOS Operating System program is stored iit the RAM that lies beneath the BASIC ROM at location 40960 ($A000), the I/O registers at location 53248 ($D000), and the Kemal ROM at location 57344 ($E000). Therefore, most of the time, the memory configuration register at location 1 is set to a value of 48 ($30), which gives the system 64K of RAM, and no ROM or I/O registers. When an application needs to use the I/O registers or the Kemal ROM routines, it needs to stop all interrupts, and to change the memory configuration register so that the system can access the I/O and ROM. This routine performs those functions. 49759 $C25F DoneWlthIO After the application has finished accessing I/O and system ROM, this routine restores interrupts, and resets the memory map back to 64K of RAM. 49762 $C262 DShlftRlght Shifts the contents of the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the X register arithmetically to the right by the number of places indicated by the contents of the Y register. 49765 $C265 CopySlrlng Copies a text string that ends in a zero byte to another location The address of the source string is contained in the zero-page pseudoregister indicated by the X register, and the destination address is contained in the pseudoregister indicated by the Y register. 49768 $C268 CopyFStrlng Copies a text string of a fixed length to another location The address of the source string is contained in the zero-page pseudoregister indicated by the X register, the destination address is contained in the pseudoregister indicated by the Y register, and the length of the string is passed in the accumulator. 49771 $C26B CmpStrlng Compares a text string that ends in a zero byte with another such string The address of the first string is contained in the zero-page pseudoregister indicated by the X register, and the address of the second string is contained in the pseudoregister indicated by the Y register. Upon completion, the status register Z flag is set if ihe two strings are equal, and the N flag is set if the first nonmatching character of the first string was lower in value than that of the second string. 294 GEOS 49807 49774 $C26E CmpFStrlng Compares two fixed-length text strings The address of the first string is contained in the zero-page pseudoregister indicated by the X register, the address of the second string is contained in the pseudoregister indicated by the Y register, and the length of the strings is passed in the acciunulator. Upon completion, the status register Z flag is set if the two strings are equal, and the N flag is set if the first nonmatching character of the first string was lower in value than that of the second string. 49777 $C271 Firstlnlt 49780 $C274 OpenRecordFile Opens the existing VLIR file whose name is contained in the zeroterminated text string pointed to by rO for access. 49783 $C277 CloseRecordFlle Calls UpdateRecordFile and sets an internal variable to show that there are no VLIR files currently open 49786 $C27A NextRecord Advances the VLIR current record pointer to the next record 49789 $C27D PrevlousRecord Moves the VLIR current record pointer back to the previous record 49792 $C280 PolntRecord Moves the VLIR current record pointer directly to the record indicated by the contents of the accumulator 49795 $C283 DeleteRecord Deletes the current record, and moves the current record pointer to the record following the one deleted 49798 $C286 InsertRecord 49801 $C289 AppendRecord 49804 $C28C ReadRecord Reads the current record (up to a maximum of r2 bytes) into the RAM buffer whose address is pointed to by r7 49807 $C28F WriteRecord Writes r2 bytes from the RAM buffer whose address is pointed to by r7 to the current record, deleting the old contents of the record 295 49810 GEOS 49810 $C292 SetNextFree Used to find the first free sector on disk after track r3L and sector r3H 49813 $C295 UpdateRecordFile Updates the VLIR file IndexTable, the time and date stamp in the Directory Entry, and the Block Allocation Map. 49816 $C298 GetPtrCurDkNm Returns the address of the name of the current disk in the zero-page pseudoregister pointed to by the X register. 49819 $C29B PromptOn Displays the cursor that was set up with InitTextPrompt at the horizontal position indicated by the variable stringX (33982/$84BE) and the vertical position indicated by stringY (33984/$84C0). 49822 $C29E PromptOff Turns off the text cursor 49825 $C2A1 OpenDisk Used after SetDevice to initialize the disk drive for reading or writing to disk. This routine reads the disk name into DrACurDkNm or DrBCurDkNm, sets r5 to point to the disk name, places the disk's directory header in curDirHead, and sets the isGEOS flag to show that the disk is a GEOS disk. 49828 $C2A4 DoInlineReturn Common return for inline routines. 49831 $C2A7 GetNextChar Returns the next character from the keyboard input buffer in the accumulator, or zero if no character is waiting. 49834 $C2AA BltmapCUp Displays a portion of the bitmap object pointed to by rO The top left comer of the object is positioned at the horizontal byte boundary rlL (0-39) and the scan line rlH. The width of the display in bytes (0-39) is passed in r2L, and the height in scan lines in r2H. The horizontal offset — expressed as the number of bytes of each line that should be skipped before printing the image in the window — is passed in rllL, and the number of bytes that remain unprinted at the end of each line is passed in rllH. The vertical offset is passed in rl2 as the number of scan lines to skip before displaying the object. 296 / 1 GEOS 49861 n 49837 $C2AD FlndBAMBit 49840 $C2B0 SelDevice Turns over the serial bus to the device whose device number is passed in the accumulator. The global variables curDevice and curDrive are updated, and any errors are returned in the X register. n 49843 $C2B3 IsMselnRegion Tests whether the mouse pointer is within the region whose upper left comer is r3, r2L and whose lower right comer is r4, r2H. If the pointer is within the region, the accumulator contains a nonzero value on return. 49846 $C2B6 ReadByte 49849 $C2B9 FreeBlock 49852 $C2BC ChangeDlskDevlce 49855 $C2BF RstrFrmDlolog Exits from the dialog box routine, restoring system variables and the screen If one of the system icons was used to exit the dialog, the icon number is retumed in rOL. 49858 $C2C2 Panic This is the default routine that is called when a BRK instmction is encountered. It opens a dialog box that displays the address of the BRK, and then quits. 49861 $C2C5 BitOtherClip Uses the input routine pointed to by rl3 (usually ReadByte) to read ^ in a Count/Bitmap group of compacted bitmap object data to the i ( 134-byte buffer pointed to by rO. Once the buffer has the compacted data in it, the routine uncompacts and displays the object. The top left comer of the object is positioned at the horizontal byte boundary pl rlL (0-39) and the scan line rlH. The width of the display in bytes (0-39) is passed in r2L, and the height in scan lines in r2H. The horizontal offset — expressed as the number of bytes of each line that should be skipped before printing the image in the window — is passed in rllL, and the number of bytes that remain unprinted at the end of each line is passed in rllH. The vertical offset is passed in rl2 as the number of scan lines to skip before displaying the object. After the clipped bitmap is displayed, BitOtherClip calls the subroutine pointed to by rl4. This subroutine should reload rO with the address of the buffer. 297 n 49864 GEOS 49864 $C2C8 StashRAM 49867 $C2CB FetchRAM 49870 $C2CE SwapRAM 49873 $C2D1 VerifyRAM 49876 $C2D4 DoRAMOp Location Range: 53248-57343 ($D000$DFFF) 4K GEOS code or I/O space Location Range:. 57344-65151 ($E000$FE7F) 8K GEOS code or 64 Kernal ROM Location Range: 65152-65529 ($FE80$FFF9) MOUSE-BASE GEOS input driver The input device is the device used to move the mouse pointer around the screen. The default device used for this purpose is a joystick, or a mouse that emulates a joystick. The program that reads the input device and reports the results to GEOS is located here. If GEOS is to use an input device other than the joystick, a new program that can read that specific device and report the results to GEOS must be placed here instead of the default joystick handler. Any such device must support three basic functions. The first nine bytes of this location range are used for a jump table, which provides fixed entry points for each of these routines. 65152 $FE80 InltMouse InitMouse performs whatever initialization the device requires, and sets the variables mouseXPosition (58/$3A), mouse YPosition (60/$3C), and mouseData (34053/$8505) to their initial values. 298 n GEOS 65158 n n 65155 $FE83 SlowMouse This routine slows down the input device so that it requires more 1^ time and movement to advance the mouse pointer a given distance, j \ GEOS calls this routine when it opens a menu, and applications may ~ call it as well. fl 65158 $FE86 UpddteMouse ^- This is the routine that GEOS calls during each interrupt to update the global variables that are associated with the input device. The routine should update mouseXPosition (58/$3A), mouseYPosition (60/$3C), mouseData (34053/$8505), pressFlag (57/$39), and inputData (34054/$8506). n n n n Appendices Appendix A A Beginner's Guide to Typing In Programs What Is a Program? A computer cannot perform any task by itself. Like a car without gas, a computer has potential, but without a program, it isn't going anywhere. Most of the programs published in this book are written in a computer language called BASIC. BASIC is easy to learn and is built into all Commodore 64s. BASIC Programs Computers can be picky. Unlike the English language, which is full of ambiguities, BASIC usually has only one right way of stating something. Every letter, character, or number is significant. A common mistake is substituting a letter such as O for the numeral 0, a lowercase 1 for the numeral 1, or an uppercase B for the numeral 8. Also, you must enter all punctuation such as colons and commas just as they appear in the book. Spacing can be important. To be safe, type in the listings exactly as they appear. Braces and Special Characters The exception to this typing rule is when you see the braces, such as {DOWN}. Anything within a set of braces is a special character or characters that cannot easily be listed on a printer. When you come across such a special statement, refer to Appendix B, "How to Type In Programs." About DATA Statements Some programs contain a section or sections of DATA statements. These lines provide information needed by the program. Some DATA statements contain actual programs (called machine language); others contain graphics codes. These lines are especially sensitive to errors. If a single number in any one DATA statement is mistyped, your qjachine could lock up, or crash. The keyboard and STOP key may seem dead, and the screen may go blank. Don't panic — no damage is done. To regain control, you have to turn off your computer, then turn it back on. This will erase whatever program was in memory, so always SAVE a copy of your program before you RUN it. If 303 Appendix A your computer crashes, you can LOAD the program and look for your mistake. Sometimes a mist3rped DATA statement will cause an error message when the program is RUN. The error message may refer to the program line that READs the data. The error is still in the DATA statements, though. Get to Know Your Machine You should familiarize yourself with your computer before attempting to type in a program. Learn the statements you use to store and retrieve programs from tape or disk. You'll want to save a copy of your program, so that you won't have to type it in every time you want to use it. Learn to use your machine's editing functions. How do you change a line if you made a mistake? You can always retype the line, but you at least need to know how to backspace. Do you know how to enter reverse video, lowercase, and control characters? It's all explained in your computer's manuals. A QiUick Review 1. Type in the program a line at a time, in order. Press RETURN at the end of each line. Use backspace or the back arrow to correct mistakes. 2. Check the line you've tj^ed against the line in the book. You can check the entire program again if you get an error when you RUN the program. 304 Appendix B How to Type In Programs To make it easy to know exactly what to type when entering one of these programs into your computer, we have established the following listing conventions. Generally, Commodore 64 program listings will contain words within braces which spell out any special characters: {DOWN} would mean to press the cursor down key. {5 SPACES} would mean to press the space bar five times. To indicate that a key should be shifted (hold down the SHIFT key while pressing the other key), the key would be underlined in our listings. For example, S would mean to type the S key while holding the SHIFT key. This would appear on your screen as a heart symbol. If you find an underlined key enclosed in braces (e.g.,{10 N}), you should type the key as many times as indicated (in our example, you would enter ten shifted N's). If a key is enclosed in special brackets, [<>], you should hold down the Commodore key while pressing the key inside the special brackets. (The Commodore key is the key in the lower-left comer of the keyboard.) Again, if the key is preceded by a number, you should press the key as many times as necessary. Rarely, you'll see a solitary letter of the alphabet enclosed in braces. These characters can be entered by holding down the CTRL key while typing the letter in the braces. For example, {A} would indicate that you should press CTRL-A. About the quote mode: You know that you can move the cursor around the screen with the CRSR keys. Sometimes a programmer will want to move the cursor under program control. That's why you see all the {LEFT}'s, {HOME}'s, and {BLU}'s in our programs. The only way the computer can tell the difference between direct and programmed cursor control is the quote mode. Once you press the quote (the double quote, SHIFT-2), you are in the quote mode. If you type something and then try to change it by moving the cursor left, you'll only get a bunch of reverse-video lines. These are the symbols for cursor left. The only editing key that isn't programmable is the DEL key; you can still use DEL to back up and edit the line. Once you type another quote, you are out of quote mode. You also go into quote mode when you INSerT spaces into a 305 Appendix B line. In any case, the easiest way to get out of quote mode is to just press RETURN. You'll then be out of quote mode and you can cursor up to the mistyped line and fix it. Use the following table when entering cursor and color control keys: Wh«nTeu Read: (clr) (home) (UP) (dov«n) (left) (right) (rvs) (OFF) (blk) (WHT) (red) (cyn) (pur) (GRN) (BLU) (YEL) Press: See: I SHIFT 1 CLR/HOME 1 CLR/HOME 1 SHIFT I f CRSR ^ If CRSR^ 1 SHIFT I^CRSR^ I^CRSR^ CTRL CTRL CTRL CTRL CTRL When You Read: m E3i m (Fl) {F2) (F3) lF4) (F5) (F6) (F7} (P8) Press: See: COMMODORE 1 '1 n COMMODORE hill COMMODORE hie COMMODORE COMMODORE LiJB nw COMMODORE COMMODORE hid COMMODORE hi IE n 306 Appendix C Screen Location Table Row 1024 1064 1104 1144 11S4 1224 12M 130< U<4 13M 1424 14M 1S04 1S44 1584 1624 1664 1704 1744 1784 I 1824 1664 im 1944 : 1984 10 15 20 25 30 35 39 Column Appendix D Screen Color Memory Table Row 0 55296 55336 55376 55416 55456 5 55496 10 ; 55616 55656 I 55696 55736 55776 55816 15 i 56016 20 ; _ . 56216 24 56256 10 15 20 Column 25 30 35 39 308 Appendix E Screen Color Codes Value To POKE For Each Color Low nybble High nybble color value color value Color Black White Red Cyan Purple Green Blue Yellow Orange Brown Light Red Dark Gray Medium Gray Light Green Light Blue Light Gray Where To POKE Color Values For Each Mode Bit or Select multicolor color value 0 0 8 1 16 9 2 32 10 3 48 11 4 64 12 5 80 13 6 96 14 7 112 15 8 128 9 144 10 160 11 176 12 192 13 208 14 224 15 240 Mode* bit-pair Location Color value Regular text 0 53281 Low nybble 1 Color memory Low nybble Multicolor 00 53281 Low nybble text 01 53282 Low nybble n 10 53283 Low nybble 11 Color memory Select multicolor Extended 00 53281 Low nybble 1 — 1 color text f 01 53282 Low nybble u 10 53283 Low nybble 11 53284 Low nybble Bitmapped 0 Screen memory Low nybble % 0 1 Screen memory High nybble | Multicolor 00 53281 Low nybble bitmapped 01 Screen memory High nybble ^: ' — 1 10 Screen memory Low nybble | Ij 11 Color memory Low nybble 309 Appendix E * For all modes, the screen border color is controlled by POKEing location 53280 with the low nybble color value, f In extended color mode, Bits 6 and 7 of each byte of screen memory serve as the bit-pair controlling background color. Because only Bits 0-5 are available for character selection, only characters with screen codes 0-63 can be used in this mode. J In the bitmapped modes, the high and low nybble color values are ORed together and POKEd into the same location in screen memory to control the colors of the corresponding cell in the bitmap. For example, to control the colors of cell 0 of the bitmap, OR the high and low nybble values and POKE the result into location 0 of screen memory. 310 Appendix F ASCII Codes ASCII CHARACTER ASCII CHARACTER 5 WHITE 50 2 8 DISABLE 51 3 SHIFT COMMODORE 52 4 9 ENABLE 53 5 SHIFT COMMODORE 54 6 13 RETURN 55 7 14 LOWERCASE 56 8 17 CURSOR DOWN 57 9 18 REVERSE VIDEO ON 58 • 19 HOME 59 20 DELETE 60 < 28 RED 61 — 29 CURSOR RIGHT 62 > 30 GREEN 63 ? 31 BLUE 64 @ 32 SPACE 65 A 33 j 66 B 34 67 C 35 # 68 D 36 $ 69 E 37 % 70 F 38 & 71 G 39 / 72 H 40 ( 73 I 41 ) 74 J 42 * 75 K 43 + 76 L 44 / 77 M 45 78 N 46 79 O 47 / 80 P 48 0 81 Q 49 1 82 R 311 Appendix F Asai CHARACTER Asai CHARACTER 83 S 120 84 T 121 □ 85 U 122 B 86 V 123 E 87 w 124 E] 88 X 125 m 89 Y 126 s 90 z 127 a 91 [ 129 ORANGE 92 £ 133 £1 93 ] 134 f3 94 t 1 135 £5 95 4— 136 £7 96 H 137 £2 97 H 138 £4 98 lU 139 £6 99 B 140 £8 100 n 141 SHIFTED RETURN 101 □ 142 UPPERCASE 102 □ 144 BLACK 103 U 1 145 CURSOR UP 104 ni 1 u 146 REVERSE VIDEO OFF 105 □ 147 CLEAR SCREEN 106 □ 148 INSERT 107 □ 149 BROWN 108 □ 150 LIGHT RED 109 151 GRAYl 110 152 GRAY 2 111 □ 153 UGHT GREEN 112 n 154 LIGHT BLUE 113 H 155 GRAY 3 114 □ 156 PURPLE 115 157 CURSOR LEFT 116 o 158 YELLOW 117 □ 159 CYAN 118 160 SPACE 119 □ 161 c 312 Appendix F |— 1 (—1 1 1 164 n LJ 16.^ n ISJO 167 JO/ r-) LJ 168 □ POOB 160 i7n 1/1/ ri 1 ■ 171 Lq 179 LI I/O i_j J74 □J □ J/o Ld U/ ra t±j 178 I/O ED 17Q 1/7 FTl □J iQn n 1Q1 n ls2 n Ji83 n 184 n IOC 185 □ n Jiv ■J 1QQ loo ISO H ion ItU 1 1 1Q1 lyi H 1Q9 B 193 S 194 CD 195 B 196 □ 197 □ 198 □ 199 0 ASCII CHARAC 200 rn 201 FTl 202 203 n 204 n LJ 205 206 [71 207 LI 208 n 209 210 n 111 fin izJ 212 in ILJ Ld 214 I2SJ U 216 in 717 rn LU 718 in LU 71Q m ttl 77n ■J 771 m LU 222 ' ' ' LIU 773 a 224 SPACE 77K D 226 Q H 777 n 22o n 77Q 227 n H □ 231 232 233 234 □ 235 m 236 a 237 H 313 Appendix F Asai CHARACTER 238 a 239 L ] 240 H 241 H 242 H 243 El 244 □ 245 246 □ 247 248 c 249 250 251 E 252 E 253 E 254 E 255 @ 0-4, 6, 7, 10-12, 15, 16, 21-27, 128, 130-132, and 143 are not used. 314 Appendix G Screen Codes Uppercase and Lower- and POKE Full Graphics Set Uppercase 0 mi 1 A a 2 B b 3 r c 4 n H U 5 E Xj F f 7 ri a » H 1 1 g T 1 1 10 T J J 11 IS. 12 L 1 1'^ in 111 14 x*x N 15 o 0 16 P p 17 Q q 18 R r 19 S s 20 T t 21 U u 22 V V 23 w w 24 X X 25 Y y 26 z z 27 [ [ 28 £ £ 29 ] ] 30 r f Uppercase and Lower- and POKE Full Graphics Set Uppercase 31 t^X 4— 32 — spac6— 33 ! ! 34 It ff 35 # # 36 $ $ 37 % % 38 39 / / 40 / V ( 41 TtX \ 42 * * J. T T 44 / / &s *to 47 / / 48 0 0 49 1 1 50 2 2 51 3 3 52 4 4 53 5 5 54 6 6 55 7 7 56 8 8 57 9 9 58 59 / 60 < < 61 Appendix G Uppercase and Lower- and POKE FuU Graphics Set Uppercase 62 > > 63 ? 7 64 B B 65 H A 66 rn R 67 I— 1 c 68 n D 69 n E 70 □ F 71 n G 72 n H 73 Li—I I 74 □ T J 75 □ K 76 n i_j L 77 M 78 [71 N 79 n 1 1 o 80 n P 81 in Q 82 n R 83 s 84 in T 85 LZJ u 86 V V 87 w 88 1 ^1 X 89 rn l_U Y 90 1' 1 z 91 E 92 |] 93 m m 94 s a 95 a 96 -space97 c c 98 y H Uppercase and Lower- and riui iyrapiucs set Uppercase 99 n n 100 □ □ 101 1 — 1 □ □ 102 H nam B 103 □ □ 104 1 — I 105 106 n LI r-m U 107 m m LB 108 l_l Ll 109 Lid rn Lid 110 □J □J 111 1 — I LJ 112 Ld Ld 113 m by m 114 s H 115 E] El 116 U 1 — 1 117 ■—1 E ■ 1 c 118 r—m U 1 — ■ □ 119 n n 120 n n 121 1 — 1 □ r— 1 □ 122 □ 0 123 EJ 124 H a 125 a E] 126 E B 127 B B Appendix H Commodore 64 Keycodes Kev Keycode Key Keycode A 10 6 19 6 28 7 24 c 20 8 27 D 18 9 32 E 14 0 35 F 21 + 40 G 26 43 H 29 £ 48 I 33 CLR/HOME 51 T J 34 INST/DEL 0 37 4— 57 T 1—1 42 46 M 36 * 49 N 39 t 54 o 38 45 p 41 / 50 o 62 53 R 17 RETURN 1 s 13 / 47 T 22 44 u 30 / 55 V 31 CRSRti 7 w 9 CRSR^ir 2 X 23 fl 4 Y 25 £3 5 z 12 £5 6 1 56 £7 3 2 59 SPACE 60 3 8 RUN/STOP 63 4 11 NO KEY 5 16 PRESSED 64 The keycode is the number £ound at location 197 for the current key being pressed. Try this one-line program: 10 PRINT PEEK (197): GOTO 10 317 Index (By Memory Location) ABS 48216 AND 45033 ASC 46987 ATN 58126 BASIC adding new commands 115, 768 current line number 57 execution of statements 776, 42980 expression evaluation 778, 44446, 44675 function evaluation 44967 pointer to bottom of string text 51 pointer to current data item address 65 pointer to current statement address 61 pointer to end of array storage 49 pointer to start of array storage 47 pointer to start of program text 43 pointer to start of variable storage 45 pointer to top of BASIC RAM 55 program text storage 2048 RAM vector table 768 Buffer cassette I/O buffer 178, 828 keyboard buffer 198, 631 RS-232 input buffer 247 RS-232 output buffer 249 text input buffer 512 cartridge, autostart ROM 32768 cassette data output line 01 I/O buffer 828 Kemal ROM routines 63466-64737 motor control 01, 192 switch sense 01 character generator ROM 01, 4096, 36864, 53248 character graphics 53248 CHAREN 01 CHRGET 115, 58274 CHR$ 46828 CIA (Complex Interface Adapter) CIA#1 56320-56335 CIA #2 56576-56591 data direction registers 56322, 56323, 56578, 56579 data ports 56320, 56321, 56576, 56577 timers 56334, 56335, 56590, 56591 clock clock speed (6510 microprocessor) 56334 software clock 160 Time of Day clock 56328, 56584 CLOSE 57799 CLR 42590 CMD 43654 cold start, BASIC 40960, 58260 color background 53281 border (frame) 53280 color codes 646 color RAM nybbles 55296 current character color 546 multicolor background registers 53282, 53283 PETASCII color change characters 59601 sprite color registers 53287-53294 sprite multicolor registers 53285, 53286 CONT 43095 COS 57956 DATA 43256 data direction register 00, 56322, 56323, 56578, 56579 data port 01, 56320, 56321, 56576, 56577 DEF 46003 DIM 45185 dynamic keyboard 198, 631 error BASIC error handler 768, 42039, 58251 error message control flag 157 I/O error status 144 RS-232 I/O error status 663 EXP 49133 expression evaluation 778, 44446, 44675 floating point addition 47207, 47210 division 47887, 47890 fixed-floating point conversion 05, 45969 floating-fixed point conversion 03, 45482, 45503 Floating Point Accumulators 97, 110 floating point-ASCII conversion 48605 318 multiplication 47656, 47667 subtraction 47194, 47197 FN 46068 FOR 42818 FRE 45949 garbage collection, string variable 46374 GET, GET* 43899 GOSUB 43139 GOTO 43168 graphics bitmapped graphics 53265 character graphics 53248 extended background color mode 53265 fine scrolling 53265, 53271 multicolor mode 53271 raster position 53265, 53266 screen blanking 53265 sprites see sprite graphics HIRAM 01 IF 43304 INT 48332 interrupt CIA hardware FLAG line 56589, 56333 ClA serial shift register 56589, 56333 CIA Time of Day clock alarm 56589, 56333 CIA Timers A and B 56589, 56333 IRQ handler 59953, 65352 IRQ vector 788, 65534 light pen IRQ 53273,53274 NMI handler 65091 NMI vector 792, 65530 raster compare IRQ 53266, 53273, 53274 sprite-display data collision IRQ 53273,53275 sprite-sprite collision IRQ 53273, 53275 INPUT 43967 INPUT# 43941 I/O current device number 186 current filename address 187 current filename length 183 current input device 153 current I/O channel number 19 current logical file number 184 current output device 154 current secondary address 185 device number table 611 logical file table 601 number of I/O files open 152 RS-232 status 663 secondary address table 621 status word codes 144 joystick controllers 56320, 56321 Kemal jump table 65409 RAM vector table 794 ACPTR 60947, 65445 CHKIN 798,61966, 65478 CHKOUT 800, 62032, 65481 CHRIN 804, 61783, 65487 CHROUT 806, 61898, 65490 CINT 65371, 65409 CIOUT 60893, 65448 CLALL 812, 62255, 65511 CUDSE 796,62097,65475 CLRCHN 802, 62259, 65484 GETIN 810, 61758, 65508 lOBASE 58624, 65523 lOINIT 64931, 65412 LISTEN 60684, 65457 LOAD 816, 62622, 65493 MEMBOT 65076, 65436 MEMTOP 65061, 65433 OPEN 794, 62282, 65472 PLOT 58634, 65520 RAMTAS 64848, 65415 RDTIM 63197, 65502 READST 65031, 65463 RESTOR 64789, 65418 SAVE 818, 62941, 65496 SCNKEY 60039, 65439 SCREEN 58629, 65517 SECOND 60857, 65427 SETLFS 65024, 65466 SETMSG 65048, 65424 SETNAM 65017, 65469 SETTIM 63204, 65499 SETTMO 65057, 65442 STOP 808,63213, 65505 TALK 60681, 65460 TKSA 60871, 65430 UDTIM 63131, 65514 UNLSN 60926,65454 UNTLK 60911, 65451 VECTOR 64794, 65421 keyboard current key pressed 203 keyboard buffer 631 keycodes 203 keyboard matrix 245, 655, 56321 last key pressed 197 number of characters in buffer 198 pointer to matrix lookup table 245 reading the keyboard 56320 repeating keys 650 LEFT$ 46848 LEN 46972 LET 43429 light pen 53267, 53268 LIST 42652 LOAD 57704 LORAM 01 MID$ 46903 NEW 42562 NEXT 44318 NMI 65095 ON GOSUB, ON GOTO 43339 OPEN 57790 Operating System (OS) OS end of RAM pointer 643 OS screen memory pointer 648 OS start of RAM pointer 641 OR 45030 paddle controllers 54297, 54298 paddle fire button 56320, 56321 PAL/NTSCflag 678 PEEK 47117 POKE 47140 POS 45982 PRINT 43680 PRINT* 43648 program text area 43, 2048 program text input buffer 512 RAM BASIC pointer to end of RAM 55 RAM/ROM selection 01 OS pointer to end of RAM 643 OS pointer to start of RAM 641 random number generator 54299 READ 44038 registers, reading/setting from BASIC 780 REM 43323 RESET, power-on 64738, 65532 reset, VIC-II chip 53270 RESTORE 43037 RESTORE k^, disabling 792, 808 RETURN 43218 RIGHT$ 46892 RND 139,57495 RS-232 baud rate 659, 661, 665 baud rate tables 58604, 65218 buffers 247,249 command register 660 connector pin assignments 56576, 56577 control register 659 duplex mode 660 handshaking protocol 660 Kemal ROM routines 57344-65535 parity 660 status register 663 stop bits 659 word length 659 RUN 43121 SAVE 57686 screen editor current character color 646 cursor color RAM position 243 cursor flash 204, 205, 207 cursor maintenance 206, 647 cursor screen position 209, 211, 214 insert mode flag 216 key repeat 650, 651, 652 quote mode flag 212 reverse character flag 199 screen line link table 217 screen RAM 1024,648,53272 shift flag 653, 654 Serial Bus I/O 56576, 60681-61114 Serial Data Port (CIA) 56332, 56588 SGN 48185 SID chip register 54272-54300 see Ulso sound SIN 57960 sound ADSR envelope control 54278-54279, 54285-54286, 54292-54293 filtering 54293-54296 frequency (pitch) control 5427254273, 54279-54280, 54286-54287 gate bit 54276 Osdllator 3 envelope generator 54300 Oscillator 3 output 54299 pulse waveform pulse width 5427454275, 54281-54282, 54288-54289 ring modulation 54276, 54283, 54290 synchronization (hard sync) 54276, 54283, 54290 volume control 54296 waveform control 54276, 54283, 54290 sprite graphics color registers 53287-53294 display priority 53275 enabling sprite display 53274 horizontal expansion 53277 multicolor color registers 53285-53286 multicolor sprites 53276 position registers 53248-53264 shape data pointers 2040 sprite-display data collision detection 53279 sprite-sprite collision detection 53278 vertical expansion 53271 SQR 49009 ST (I/O status word) 144 stack, 6510 microprocessor 256 320 STOP 43055 STOP key 145, 808 STR$ 46181 SYS 780,57642 TAN 56083 Time of Day clock 56328-56331, 5658456587 timers, hardware 56324-56327, 5633456335, 56580-56583, 56590-56591 tokens, keyword 772, 774, 40972, 41042, 41088, 41118, 42364, 42772 User Port 56567-56577 USR 785 VAL 47021 variable array variable storage 47 find or create variable routine 45195 storage format 45 string text area 51 VERIFY 57701 VIC-II CHIP memory bank switching 56576 registers 53248-53294 see also graphics, sprite graphics warm start, BASIC 40962, 58235 WAIT 47149 wedges 115 321 GEOS Index (By Memory Location) alarmSetFlag 34076 alarmTmtVector 33965-33966 alphaHag 33972 AppendRecord 49801 applicationMain 33947-33948 baselineOffset 38 BBMult 49504 BitmapClip 49834 BitmapUp 49474 BitOtherClip 49861 BldGDirEntoy 49651 BlkAlloc 49660 BlockProcess 49420 BMult 49507 BootGEOS 49152 BRKVector 33967-33968 CalcBlksFree 49627 CallRoutine 49624 cardDataPointer 44-45 ChangeDiskDevice 49852 ChkDkGEOS 49630 ClearMouseMode 49564 ClearRam 49528 CloseRecordFile 49783 CmpFString 49774 CmpString 49771 CopyFString 49768 CopyString 49765 CRC 49678 curDirHead 33280-33535 ciirDrive 33929 curRecord 33942 currentHeight 41 oiirentlndexTable 42-43 currentMode 46 currentPattem 34-35 mrrentSetWidth 39-40 Dabs 49519 dataDiskName 33875-33892 dataFileName 33858-33874 day 34072 dblClickCount 34069 Ddec 49525 Ddiv 49513 DeleteFUe 49720 DeleteRecord 49795 dirEntryBuf 33792-33821 DisablSprite 49621 diskBlkBuf 32768-33023 diskOpenFlg 33930 displayBufferOn 47 dlgBoxRamBuf 34079-34495 322 DMult 49510 Dnegate 49522 DoDlgBox 49750 Dolcons 49498 DoInlineRetum 49828 DoMenu An A on 49489 DoneWithIO 49759 DoPreviousMenu 49552 DoRAMOp 49876 DrACurDkNm 33822-33839 DrawLine 49456 DrawPoint 49459 DrawSprite 49606 DrBCurDkNm 33840-33857 driveTj'pe 33934-33937 DSdiv 49516 DShiftLeft 49501 DShiftRight 49762 EnableProcess 49417 EnablSprite 49618 EnterDeskTop 49708 EnterTurbo 49684 ExitTurbo 49714 FastDelFile 49732 faultData 33974 FetchRAM 49867 fileHeader 33024-33279 fileSize 33945-33946 fileTrScTab 33536-33791 fileWritten 33944 FillRam 49531 FindBAMBit 49837 FindFUe 49675 FindFTypes 49723 Firstlnit 49777 FollowChain 49669 FrameRectangle 49447 FreeBlock 49849 FreeFile 49702 FreezeProcess 49426 GetBlock 49636 GetCharWidth 49609 GetDimensions 30988 GetDirHead 49735 GetFHdrlnfo 49705 GetFile 49672 GetFreeDirBlk 49654 GetNextChar 49831 GetPtrCurDkNm 49816 GetRandom 49543 GetRealSize 49585 GetScanLine 49468 GetSeri^lNumber 49558 49594 GotoFirstMenu 49597 M r>fi i Iri no VJl a L/l 11^9 1^ U 11 IK 49462 1 lwll£iUlllClll_illlC 49432 hour 34073 49579 33973 i—FillRam 49588 i_FraineRectangle 49570 i GraphicsString 49576 i TmnrintRprtano'lp ' ' " ll'l 11 1 llXC^ LCIl 49747 i A^nvpT^Afa 49591 ImprintRectangle 49744 InitForlO 49756 InitForPrint 30976 Tn 1 fA^m i gp 65152 InitProcesses 49411 InitRam 49537 InitTextPrompt 49600 inputData 34054-34057 inmitVprfnr 33957-33958 InsertRecord 49798 interleave 33932 in terruptBottom Vector 33951-33952 InterruptMain 49408 1 Ti tPi*M 1 TitXoTi Vpf tnr U 1 IKi 1 U L/ 1 X lUl Tnvpt+T inp 49435 InvertRectangle 49450 1 Piif^frinof 1 1 1 Ul^UlllK 49582 i— ^ecoverRectangle 49573 i__Rectangle 49567 isGEOS 33931 IsMselnRegion 49843 IcPvOafa 34052 ifPvVppfnT T Annlir 49693 T Jrjp^lc Arr 49687 LdFile 49681 IpffMarcHn 1 W 1 UTICU Kll i 53-54 T nadCharSpt 49612 K^ainT nnn IVICUI 1 LdU V L/ 49603 34049 m pnti ^1 imViPT lllCllUllI UlllL'd 33975 minimi imA4raispQnppH 11 111 Ull I Ull UVl v U9Cti7 L/CCU 34050 minutes 34074 month 34071 mouseAcceleration 34051 mouseBottom 33977 mouseData 34053 mouseFaultVector 33959-33960 mouseLeft 33978-33979 MouseOff 49549 mouseOn 48 mousePicData 33985-34048 mousePicture 49-50 mouseRig^t 33980-33981 mouseTop 33976 49546 58-59 mouse YPosition 60 MoveData 49534 NIpwT^icV 49633 NIpy f 1? &cc\vA 1 N CA I iVCL. vX U 49786 m 1 vpc 33933 NytBlkAllnr 49741 f^npn T\x c V \JuXSI. I L/l9l^ 49825 OpenRecordFile 49780 otherPiess Vector 33961-33962 Panic 49858 1 uuiiAcCi/ru 49795 49615 49789 PrintASCII 30991 PrinfRiiffpr Pi*n f c V^Ja m p X XlltLi/XoKXNClUlC Pm tFi 1 pn am p X 1 1 i ti xiwi imi 33893-33909 PrnmnfOff X rumptwii 49R1 9 Pi itvpT*! 1 X Ulg" ' LUUi/ 49717 PiitRlnrlc 1 U I l/lvf^A 49639 PutChar 49477 PutDecimal 49540 PiitDirHpaH 1 UtLi/111 ICflU 49738 PutString 49480 i*anHfim 1 CU lUUll 1 34058-34059 RpaHRInrk 49690 RpaHRvtp 49846 RpaHFilp 49663 RpaHRpiYtrH 49804 RecoverAllMenus 49495 RecoverLine 49438 RecoverMenu 49492 P ppo vptP ppf an ol p 49453 P pfn voi'VpfH'rif ACi.U vex VCLliiX 33969-33970 P n nl a iVcLtaxigLc 49444 P aT^n\^av% 1 1 Ac x^uivicnu PpnampPilo ACX loxx vsr xxc 49753 P pcptMa n H 1 P 49155 RestartProcess 49414 retumAddress 61-62 rightMargin 55-56 RstrAppl 49726 RstrFnnDialog 49855 SaveFUe 49645 saveFontTab 34060-34068 screenColors 34078 seconds 34075 selectionFlash 33971 SetDevice 49840 323 SetGDirEntiy 49648 SetGEOSDisk 49642 SetNextFree 49810 SetPattem 49465 Sleep 49561 65155 49666 sprlpic 35392-35455 spr2pic 35456-35519 sprSpic 35520-35583 spr4pic 35584-35647 sprSpic 35648-35711 spr6pic 35712-35775 spr7pic 35776-35839 StartAppI 49711 StartMouseMode 49486 StartPrint 30979 StashRAM 49864 StopPrint 30985 string 36-37 StringFaultVector 33963-33964 stringX 33982-3398i stringY 33984 SwapRAM 49870 sysDBData 34077 TestPoint 49471 ToBasic 49729 turboFlags 33938-33941 UnblockProcesfi 49423 UnfreezeProcess 49429 UpdateMouse 65158 UpdateRecordFile 49813 u'sedRecords 33943 UseSystemFont 49483 VerifyRAM 49873 VeiticalLine 49441 VerWriteBlock 49699 windowBottom 52 windowTop 51 WriteBlock 49696 WriteFile 49657 WriteRecord 49807 year 34070 324 □ □ n □ o n □ n D ■ just wore out my first copy after several months V of extensive handling, and am rushing to get another one before my programming comes to a standstill. " — TPUG magazine Mapping the Commodore 64 and 64C is a detailed and compreiiensive explanation ol the Commodore 64 and 64C computers' memory. This Is the detinitive work— complete and clear discussions of all the important user-alterable memory locations in the computer, as well as details of the BASIC and Operating System routines in permanent memory (ROM), and of GEOS from Berkeley Softworks. Whether you're programming in BASIC or in machine language, you'll find this sourcebook invaluable. Serving both as an introduction to 64 architecture and memory use, as well as an excellent resource to help you tap the computer's powerful, but hidden, features, Mapping the Commodore 64 and 64C includes: • A complete memory map of GEOS • An explanation of all Kernal and BASIC routines • Demonstration programs for many of the operating routines • How to turn individual bits on and off • The details about how to create and use sprites in your programs • How to create the precise sound effects you want • How to create your own characters and where to safely store them • A program that allows single keystroke entry of BASIC keywords ^ If you're familiar with BASIC, you'll turn to this book again and again for instruction, advice, and clarification. If you're already programming in machine language, you'll find this book an indispensable guide to memory locations and routines. But no matter what your programming level, once you've used Mapping the Commodore 64 and 64C, you'll wonder how you ever got along without it. ISBN 0-87455-082-3

---
