# Memory Page 121

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: InltForPrint This routine gives the printer driver the opportunity to pass to the printer any special setup codes that might be required before starting to print. If the printer does not require any such codes, this routine does nothing except return control to the calling routine. 30979 $7903 StartPrint StartPrint opens the printer device using the Commodore Kemal routines, and sends the codes necessary to put the printer into graphics mode. It first calls the GEOS SetDevice to let it know that file printer (device number 4) is being used. Next, the GEOS InitForlO routine is called to disable interrupts and bank in the Kemal ROM and I/O space in place of the RAM where the GEOS code resides. From then on, the normal 64 Kemal routines are used to open the printer device, and send it the codes to put the printer into graphics mode. Finally, the GEOS DoneWithIO routine is called to enable intermpts and bank out the I/O space and Kemal ROM. 30982 $7906 PrlntBuffer PrintBuffer actually does the printing. Before calling the routine, the application must put the data for one row of 80 cards into the print buffer pointed to by rO, and must pass the address of a 640-byte workspace in rl, whose location remains constant between caUs to PrintBuffer. Note that the print buffer has space for a print row 80 cards wide, which means ttiat it can hold up to 640 pixels across. Since this is twice as wide as the actual 64 screen itself, it is possible to print pictures that are larger than the physical screen (geoPaint can create such pictures, for example). Since each row must be 80 cards wide, it is up to the application to pad the beginning or end of the line with blanks if there is not enough screen data to fill up the buffer. The Print Buffer routine takes the data in the buffer, converts it to a format that the printer can use, and sends as much of it to the 257
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 30976
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $7900
man: Page 271

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: StopPrlnt StopPrint is called at the end of the page to send a form-feed character to the printer, and to flush the work buffer. Before calling it, the application must put the address of the print buffer in rO, and tihe address of the work buffer in rl. 30988 $790C GetDlmensions This routine returns the number of cards of screen data that the printer can fit onto an 8 X 10.5-inch area of the paper, where a card is defined as a block eight pixels high and eight pixels wide. Upon return, the X register holds the maximum print width in cards, and the Y register holds the maximum print height in card rows. 30991 $790F Print ASCII This routine is used to send an ASCII character to the printer in text character mode, not graphics mode. Location Range: 32576-32767 ($7F40$7FFF) APPLICATION_VAR Application-free RAM The applications programmer may use the 192 bytes at the end of the background screen area as additional variable storage space. Location Range: 32768-35327 ($8000$89FF) OS_VARS GEOS Operating System RAM variable storage and work area This area includes space for disk buffers and storage of general information about disk operations, such as disk names, filenames, disk buffers, the number and types of drives available, and so on. It also includes the important vector table that is used to link the application code with the GEOS Main Loop and Interrupt Handler programs. Finally, there are a host of system variables used to maintain the mouse pointer, icon and menu selection imagery, the alarm clock, and other system information. 32768-33023 $8000-$80FF diskBIkBuf General disk block buffer 258
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 30985
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $7909
man: Page 272

---
