# Memory Page 166

nome: RUNG
descrizione: ' Reset Pointer to Current Text Character to the Beginning of Program Text [—1 This routine resets the CHRGET pointer TXTPTR (122-123, $7A' ' $7B) so that the next byte of text that the interpreter will read comes from the beginning of program text. 42652 $A69C LIST Perform LIST This routine saves the range of lines to be printed in pointers at 9596 ($5F- $60) and 20-21 ($14-$15), and then prints them out, tiranslating any tokens back to their ASCII equivalent. 42775 $A717 OPLOP Print BASIC Tokens as ASCII Characters This is the part of the LIST routine that changes one-byte program tokens back to their ASCII text characters. The routine is vectored through RAM at 774 ($306), so it is possible to list out new command words that you have added by changing this vector to detour through your own routine. 42818 $A742 FOR Perform FOR FOR is performed mostly by saving the needed information for the NEXT part of the command on the stack (see the entry for 256 ($100) for details). This includes the TO termination value, so if the upper limit is a variable, the current value of the variable will be stored, and you cannot end the loop early by decreasing the value of the TO variable within the loop (although you can end it early by increasing the value of the FOR variable within the loop). Also, since the TO expression is evaluated only once, at the time FOR is performed, a statement such as FOR 1=1 TO I+lOO is valid. The terminating value is not checked until NEXT is executed, so the loop statements always execute at least once. The variable used by FOR must be a nonarray floating point variable. Reusing the same FOR variable used in a loop that is still active will cause the previous FOR loop and all intervening loops to be cancelled. 42926 $A7AE NEWSTT Set Up Next Statement for Execution 1^ This routine tests for the STOP key, updates the pointer to the curI 1 rent line number, and positions the text pointer to read the beginning of the statement. n 97
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 42638
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A68E
man: Page 111

---
