# Memory Page 253

nome: RESTOR
descrizione: Restore RAM Vectors for Default I/O Routines This documented Kemal routine can be entered through the jump table at 65418 ($FF8A). It sets the values for the 16 RAM vectors to the interrupt and important Kemal I/O routines in the table that starts at 788 ($314) to the standard values held in the ROM table at 64816 ($FD30) below. 64794 $FD1A VECTOR Set the RAM Vector Table from the Table Pointed to by .X and .Y This documented Kemal routine can be entered through the jump table at 65421 ($FF8D). It is used to read or change the values for the 16 RAM vectors to the interrupt and important Kemal I/O routines in the table that starts at 788 ($314). If the Carry flag is set when the routine is called, the current value of the 16 vectors will be stored at a table whose address is pointed to by the values in the .X and .Y registers. If the Carry flag is cleared, the RAM vectors will be loaded from the table whose address is pointed to by the .X and .Y registers. Since this routine can change the vectors for the IRQ and NMI intermpts, you might expect that the Interrupt disable flag would be set at its beginning. Such is not the case, however, and therefore it would be wise to execute an SEI before calling it and a CLI afterwards (as the power-on RESET routine does) just to be safe. 64816 $FD30 Table of RAM Vectors to the Default I/O Routines This table contains the 16 RAM I/O vectors that are moved to 788819 ($314- $333). 64848 $FD50 RAMTAS Perform RAM Test and Set Pointers to the Top and Bottom of RAM This documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through location 65415 ($FF87) of the jump table, performs a number of initialization tasks. First, it clears Pages 0, 2, and 3 of memory to zeros. Next, it sets the tape buffer pointer to address 828 ($33C), and performs a nondestructive test of RAM from 1024 ($400) up. When it reaches a nonRAM address (presumably the BASIC ROM at 40960, $A000), that address is placed in the top of memory pointer at 643-4 ($283-4). The bottom of memory pointer at 641-2 ($281-2) is set to point to address 2048 ($800), which is the beginning of BASIC program text. 237
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 64789
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $FD15
man: Page 251

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Table of IRQ Vectors This table holds the vectors to the four IRQ routines which the system uses. The first points to Part 1 of the cassette write routine at 64618 ($FC6A), the second to Part 2 of the cassette write routine at 64461 ($FBCD), the third to the standard scan-keyboard IRQ at 59953 ($EA31), and the last to the cassette read routine at 63788 ($F92C). 64931 $FDA3 lOINIT Initialize CIA I/O Devices This documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through the jump table at 65412 ($FF84), initializes the Complex Interface Adapter (CIA) devices, and turns the volume of the SID chip off. As part of this initialization, it sets CIA #1 Timer A to cause an IRQ interrupt every sixtieth of a second. 65017 $FDF9 SETNAM Set Filename Parameters This is a documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through the jump table at location 65469 ($FFBD). It puts the value in the Accumulator into the location which stores the number of characters in the filename, and sets the pointer to the address of the ASCII text of the filename from the .X and .Y registers. This sets up the filename for the OPEN, LOAD, or SAVE routine. 65024 $FEOO SETLFS Set Logical File Number, Device Number, and Secondary Address This is a documented Kemal routine, which can be entered through the jump table at location 65466 ($FFBA). It stores the value in the Accumulator in the location which holds the current logical file number, the value in the .X register is put in the location tiiat holds the current device number, and the value in the .Y register is stored in the location that holds the current secondary address. If no secondary address is used, the .Y register should be set to 255 ($FF). It is necessary to set the values of the current file number, device number, and secondary address before you OPEN a file, or LOAD or SAVE. 238
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 64923
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $FD9B
man: Page 252

---
