# Memory Page 229

nome: SCREEN
descrizione: Store Number of Screen Rows and Columns in .Y and .X This is a documented Kemal routine which is vectored in the jump table at 65517 ($FFED), and is provided to allow for program compatibility between computers. When called, this subroutine returns the number of screen columns in the .X register, and the number of screen rows in .Y. Thus, a program can detect the screen format of the machine on which it is running, and make sure that text output is formatted accordingly. The present version of this routine loads the .X register with 40 ($28) and the .Y register with 25 ($19). 58634 $E50A PLOT Read/Set Location of the Cursor The jump table entry for this dociunented Kemal is at 65520 ($FFFO). The routine allows the user to read or set the position of the cursor. If the carry flag is set with a SEC instruction before calling this subroutine, cursor column (X position) will be returned in the .X register, and the cursor row (Y position) will be returned in the .Y register. If the carry flag is cleared with a CLC instruction before entering this routine, and the .Y and .X registers are loaded with the desired row and column positions respectively, this routine will set the cursor position accordingly. The current read routine loads .X and .Y from locations 214 ($D6) and 211 ($D3) respectively. The cursor set routine stores .X and .Y in these locations, and calls the routine that sets the screen pointers at 58732 ($E56C). The user can access this routine from BASIC by loading the .X, .Y, and .P register values desired to the save area starting at 780 ($30C). 58648 $E518 Initialize Screen and Keyboard This is the original CINT Kernal routine, to which additions were made in later versions of the Kemal. After calling the routine at 58784 ($E5A0) to set up default I/O values, this routine initializes the cuirsor blink flags, the keyboard decode vector, the key repeat delay and frequency counters, the current color code, and maximum keyboard buffer size. It then falls through to the next routine. 58692 $E544 Initialize the Screen Line Link Table and Clear the Screen This routine initializes the screen line link table at 217 ($D9), clears 215
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 58629
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $E505
man: Page 229

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Home the Cursor This routine sets PNTR (211, $D3) and TBLX (214, $D6) to 0, and falls through to the next routine. 58732 $E56C Set Pointer to Current Screen Line This routine sets the pointer PNT (209, $D1) to the address of the first byte of the current logical line. In figuring this address, it takes into account the status of the screen line link table, which can indicate that two physical lines should be joined as one logical line. 58784 $E5A0 Set Default I/O Devices and Set Default Values for VIC-II Chip Registers This routine sets the keyboard and screen as the current input and output devices. It then writes the default values found in the table at 60601 ($ECB9) to the VIC-II chip. 58804 $E5B4 LP2 Get a Character from the Keyboard Buffer This routine transfers the first character from the keyboard buffer to the .A register, bumps the rest of the characters one place up in line, and decrements the pointer, showing how many characters are waiting in the buffer. 58826 $E5CA Wait for a Carriage Return from the Keyboard This subroutine is called by the portion of the CHRIN routine that handles keyboard input. It turns the cursor on, gets characters, and echoes them to the screen until a carriage return has been entered. It also looks for the shifted RUN/STOP key, and forces the output of the commands LOAD and RUN if it finds it. 58930 $E632 Input a Character from Screen or Keyboard This routine is the portion of the Kemal CHRIN routine that handles input from the keyboard and screen devices. CHRIN gets one byte at a time from the current screen position, or inputs a whole line from the keyboard and returns it one byte at a time. 216
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 58726
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $E566
man: Page 230

---
