# Memory Page 128

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Autostart ROM Cartridge An 8K or 16K autostart ROM cartridge designed to use this as a starting memory address may be plugged into the Expansion Port on the back. If the cartridge ROM at locations 32772-32776 ($8004$8008) contains the numbers 195, 194, 205, 56, 48 ($C3, $C2, $CD, $38, $30) when the computer powers up, it will start the program pointed to by the vector at locations 32768-32769 ($8000-$8001), and will use 32770-32771 ($8002-$8003) for a warm start vector when the RESTORE key is pressed. These characters are PETASCII for the inverse letters CBM, followed by the digits 80. An autostart cartridge may also be addressed at 40960 ($A000), where it would replace BASIC, or at 61440 ($FOO0), where it would replace the Kemal. It is possible to have a 16K cartridge sitting at 32768 ($8000), such as Simon's BASIC, which can be turned on and off so that the BASIC ROM underneath can also be used. Finally, it is even possible to have bank-selected cartridges, which turn banks of memory in the cartridge on and off alternately, so that a 32K program could fit into only 16K of addressing space. 36864-40959 $9000-$9FFF Character ROM Image for VIC-U Chip When Using Memory Bank 2 When the VIC-II chip is set up to use the third 16K block of memory for graphics (as would be the case when the 64 is set up to emulate the PET, which has its text screen memory at 32768, $8000, it sees the character generator ROM at this address (see entry at 4096 ($1000) above for more details). It should be noted that the character ROM is available only when the VIC-II chip is using banks 0 or 2. When using one of the other two banks, the user must supply all of the character shape data in a RAM table. 84
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 32768
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $8000
man: Page 98 Chapter 5 8K BASIC ROM and 4K Free RAM * • • Page 99 The text on this page is estimated to be only 3.00% accurate □ y a P O u G U Q Page 100 8K BASIC ROM and 4K Free RAM Locations 40960 to 49151 ($A000 to $BFFF) are used by the BASIC ROM when it is selected (which is the default condition). BASIC is the 64's main program, which is always run if there is no autostart cartridge inserted at power-up time. When the 64 tells you READY, that's BASIC talking. The BASIC interpreter that comes with the 64 is, aside from being located in a different memory space, almost identical to the Microsoft BASIC interpreter found on the VIC-20. Both of these interpreters are slightiy modified versions of PET BASIC 2.0, also known as PET BASIC 3.0 or Upgrade BASIC, because it was an upgraded version of the BASIC found on the original PET. This is a somewhat mixed blessing, because while PET BASIC was, in its day, quite an advanced language for use with an eight-bit microprocessor, it lacks several of the features (such as error trapping) which are now standard on most home computers. And, of course, it makes no provision whatever for easy use of the many graphics and sound capabilities made available by the new dedicated video and sound support chips. On the other hand, its faithfulness to the original Commodore BASIC allows a large body of software to be translated for the 64 with little change (in most cases, the PET Emulator program from Commodore will allow you to run PET programs with no changes). Programming aids and tricks developed for the PET and VIC will, for the most part, carry over quite nicely to the 64. Although there is no official source code listing of the ROM available from Commodore, this version of BASIC has been around long enough that it has been thoroughly disassembled, dissected, and documented by PET users. The labels used here correspond to those used by Jim Butterfield in his PET memory maps, which are well-known among PET BASIC users. They should, therefore, provide some assistance in locating equivalent routines on the two machines. A good description of the 87 Page 101

---
