# Memory Page 179

nome: GIVAYF
descrizione: Convert 16-Bit Signed Integer to Floating Point This routine treats the value in the Accumulator as the high byte of a 16-bit signed integer, and the value in the .Y register as the low byte, and converts the signed integer into a floating point number in the Floating Point Accumulator. The address of this routine is pointed to by the RAM vector at 5-6, and the routine can be used to return an argument from the USR call in the Floating Point Accumulator. 45982 $B39E POS Perform POS The POS command calls the Kemal PLOT routine (58634, $E50A) to get the position of the cursor on the logical line. What it really does is an equivalent of PEEK (211). Remember, since we are dealing with a logical line, this number can be over 39. The statement "THIS SENTENCE IS LONGER THAN ONE PHYSICAL LINE";POS(X) will return a value of 48 for the POS(X). 45990 $B3A6 ERRDIR Check If the Program Is Running in Direct Mode, and If So Issue an Error This routine is called by statements that prohibit execution in direct mode. It checks a flag that is set when a line without a line number is entered, and causes an ILLEGAL DIRECT error if the flag is set. 46003 $B3B3 DEF Perform DEF DEF performs some syntax checking, and pushes five bytes onto the stack: the first byte of the function statement, a two-byte pointer to the dependent variable (the X in FN(X)), and the address of the first character of the definition itself, where it resides in program text. The DEF statement must fit on one line, but functions can be extended by nesting them (having one function call another). 46049 $B3E1 GETFNM Check DEF and FN Syntax This routine checks to make sure that FN follows DEF, and that the dependent variable has a valid floating point variable name. It calls the routine to find or create a variable to get the pointer to its address. 107
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 45969
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B391
man: Page 121

---

nome: FNDOER
descrizione: Perform FN The FN evaluation is done by evaluating the FN argument (for example, FN(A+B*C/D)) and then getting the rest of the expression \ j from the text of the function definition statement. The function vari- — able descriptor area is used as a work area, and the dependent variable is not disturbed (so that if the definition used FN(X), the value of X will not be changed by the function call). 46181 $B465 STRD Perform STR$ STR$ first checks to make sure that the parameter is a number, and then calls the routines that convert floating point to ASCII and create the pointers to a string constant. 46215 $B487 STRUT Scan and Set Up Pointers to a String in Memory This routine calculates the length of the string, and calls the routine that allocates space in memory. It then saves the string, or creates a pointer to its location in the BASIC text input buffer at 512 ($200). 46324 $B4F4 GETSPA Allocate Space in Memory for String The amount of space needed for a string is passed to this routine, and the routine checks if there is that amount of space available in free memory. If not, it does a garbage collection and tries again. 46374 $B526 GARBAG String Garbage Collection Whenever a string is changed in any way, the revised version of the text is added to the bottom of the string text area, leaving the old version higher up in memory, wasting space. In order to reclaim that space, the descriptor for every string j / whose text is in the string text area (rather than in the program text ' — * area) must be searched to find the valid text that is highest in memory. If that string is not as high as it could be, it is moved up to replace any string that is no longer valid. Then all of the string descriptors must be searched again to find the next highest string and move it up. This continues until every string that is in use has been covered. After all have been moved up, the pointer to the bottom of ( i string text at 51-52 ($33-$34) is changed to show the new bottom location. If there are more than a few strings whose text is in the string text storage area, rather than in the body of the program, scanning every string as many times as there are strings can take an awful lot 108 U
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 46068
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B3F4
man: Page 122

---
