# Memory Page 241

nome: CHRIN
descrizione: Input a Character from the Current Device This is a documented Kemal routine whose jump table entry point is at 65487 ($FFCF). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 804 ($324). Its function is to get a character from the current input device (whose device number is stored at 153, $99). This device must first have been OPENed and then designated as the input channel by the CHKIN routine. When this routine is called, the next byte of data available from this device is returned in the Accumulator. The only exception is the routine for the keyboard device (which is the default input device). If the keyboard is the current input device, this routine blinks the cursor, fetches characters from the keyboard buffer, and echoes them to the screen until a carriage return is encountered. When a carriage return is found, the routine sets a flag to indicate the length of the last logical line before the return character, and reads the first character of this logical line from the screen. Subsequent calls to this routine will cause the next character in the line to be read from the screen and returned in the Accumulator, until the carriage return character is returned to indicate the end of the line. Any call after this character is received will start the whole process over again. Note that only the last logical line before the carriage return is used. Any time you type in more than 80 characters, a new logical line is started. This routine will ignore any characters on the old logical line, and process only the most recent 80-character group. 61898 $F1CA CHROUT Output a Byte This is a documented Kemal routine whose jump table entry point is at 65490 ($FFD2). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 806 ($326). It is probably one of the best known and most used Kemal routines, because it sends the character in the Accumulator to the current output device. Unless a device has been OPENed and designated as the current output channel using the CHKOUT routine, the character is printed to the screen, which is the default output device. If the cassette is the current device, outputting a byte will only add it to the buffer. No actual transmission of data will occur until the 192byte buffer is full. 228
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 61783
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $F157
man: Page 242

---
