# Memory Page 194

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: LdDeskAcc Loads the desk accessory file whose Directory Entry is pointed to by r9, and runs it. The appropriate portions of the current application are saved to disk so that it may be restored when the accessory exits. 49690 $C21A ReadBlock 49693 $C21D LdApplic Loads the application file whose Directory Entry is pointed to by r9, and runs it. 49696 $C220 WziteBlock 49699 $0223 VerWriteBlock 49702 $C226 FreeFUe 49705 $C229 GetFHdrlnfo Reads a data file of size r2, starting at track rlL, sector rlH, into memory at the address pointed to by r7. 49708 $C22C EnterDeskTop Reinitializes GEOS and loads and runs the deskTop program. Application programs should do a JMP here when they are finished. 49711 $C22F StaitAppl 49714 $C232 ExitTurbo This routine switches the 1541 disk drive back to using its own ROM operating system, rather than the turbo code stored in disk RAM. It leaves the turbo code in disk RAM, however, so that turbo mode may be easily entered again. 49717 $0235 PurgeTurbo Stops execution of the turbo code and marks the turboFlag for the current drive to indicate that the turbo code is no longer loaded in disk RAM. 49720 $0238 DeleteFlle Deletes the file whose name is contained in the zero-terminated string pointed to by rO. 49723 $023B FlndFTypes This routine is used to build a list of files that match the file type passed in r7L. File types include NOT_GEOS, BASIC, ASSEMBLY, DATA, SYSTEM, DESK_ACC, APPL_DATA, FONT, PRINTER, 288
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49687
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C217
man: Page 302

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: RstrAppl After a desk accessory program has exited, this routine replaces the contents of memory so as to restore the application that was running when the desk accessory started. 49729 $C241 ToBasic Transfers control from GEOS to Commodore 64 BASIC. 49732 $C244 FastDelFile Used to quickly delete the file whose name is contained in the zeroterminated string pointed to by rO, when a list containing the track and sector number of every disk block used by the file is pointed to by r3. 49735 $C247 GetDirHead Reads the directory header from the current disk into the buffer at CurDirHead. 49738 $C24A PutDirHead Writes the directory header from curDirHead out to disk. 49741 $C24D NxtBlkAUoc Continues allocating blocks on disk for writing r2 number of bytes using the track and sector allocation table pointed to by r6 after BlkAUoc has allocated its maximum of 32,258 bytes. The last track and sector allocated by BlkAUoc is indicated by rS. 49744 $C250 ImprintRectangle Moves the rectangle bordered by r3,r2L to r4,r3H from the foreground screen to the backgroimd screen. 49747 $C253 l_ImprlntRectangle Moves a rectangle from the foreground screen to the background screen. The boundaries of the rectangle are specified by the data that follows immediately after the JSR instruction. The first two bytes give the coordinates for the top and bottom of the rectangle, and the two words which follow give the coordinates of the left and right sides. 289
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49726
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C23E
man: Page 303

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: DoDlgBox Opens the dialog box whose definition table is pointed to by rO, saving the portion of the screen that the box overwrites and all system variables. This dialog box remains active until the dialog is exited with a call to RstrFrmDialog. A dialog box is a window that opens on top of the application screen, and temporarily takes control away from the application, forcing the user to take some action. When the user responds, the dialog is exited, and the application is restored. A dialog box can be used to display a message to the user, or to get text input, numeric input, or other types of instructions from the user. It can even provide a list of files to select from. The key to using a dialog box is in setting up the data table that defines its appearance and function. This table is made up of several parts, each of which can vary in length depending on how many entries you add. The first part of the table specifies the position of the dialog box, and the fill pattern used to draw the shadow box that outlines the dialog box below and to the right. The first byte is a flag that shows whether the position used is the standard GEOS position or a user-defined position. Possible values are 128/$80, indicating that ' the box will be placed according to GEOS defaults, and 0, indicating that the box will be placed at a user-defined location. To these values are added the number of the fUl pattern (0-33) used to shadow the box. If a user-defined position is specified, the next six bytes are used to define the top right and bottom left comers of the box: .byte TopY )yl (0-199) .byteBottomY ;y2 (0-199) .word LeftX ixl (0-319) .word RightX ;x2 (0-319) After the position specifier come icon blocks or command blocks. Icon blocks are used to put up icons. GEOS provides a number of system icons that are available to the programmer. These icons display various messages, and when the user clicks on one, the dialog box exits, returning the number of the icon selected in rOL. To include one of these icons in the dialog box, the programmer need only include an icon block in the definition table, in the following format: .byte ICON-NUMBER .byte XPosition ;in bytes — drawing starts on a byte .byte YPosition ;in pixels 290
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49750
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C256
man: Page 304 The first value is the icon number. The system provides the following icons: Number Icon 1 OK 2 Cancel 3 Yes 4 No 5 OPEN 6 DISK 7-10 Reserved for future use The next two bytes give position offsets for the icon. These offsets show how far the icon should be placed from the upper left corner of the box. The horizontal offset is measured in bytes, while the vertical one is measured in pixels. In addition to icon blocks, your dialog box definition table may include one or more command blocks. These consist of a command number followed by some additional information needed to implement the command. These commands allow you to draw text, receive text from the user, or even set up a scrolling file-selection window. The eight defined commands are discussed below. After you have included all of the icon blocks and command blocks that you want in the dialog, use an entry of a single zero byte to signal the end of the dialog box definition table. DBTXSTR (11) displays a text string ending in a zero byte. The format for this command block is: .byte 11 ;command number .byte Xoffset ;horizontal offset from left of box ; (in bytes) .byte Yoffset ;vertical offset from top of box ; (in pixels) .word Text—Pointer ;address of the text string DBVARSTR (12) displays a variable text string ending in a zero byte. You can change the contents of the string by changing the contents of the pseudoregister used to point to it between calls to DoDlgBox. The format for this command block is: .byte 12 ;command number .bj^e Xoffset ;horizontal offset from left of box ; (in bytes) .byte Yoffset ;vertical offset from top of box ; (in pixels) .byte Register—Number ;number of pseudoregister that contains ; the address of the string Page 305 49750 aEOS DBGETSTRING (13) gets a string of ASCII characters from the user and places them into a text buffer. The string is displayed in the dialog box as the user types it in. The format for this command block is: .byte 13 ;command number .byte Xoffset ;horizontal offset from left of box ; (in bytes) .byte Yoffset ;vertical offset from top of box ; (in pixels) .byte Register—Number ;number of pseudoregister that contains ; the address of the buffer in which the ; the string will be stored .byte Maximum_Chars ;the maximum number of characters to be ; stored in the text buffer DBSYSOPV (14) causes any mouse button press that occurs when the pointer is not over an icon to force a return to the application. This command block requires no additional information, and consists only of the command number: .byte 14 ;command number DBGRPHSTR (15) causes a graphics string to be executed. This is a string of graphics drawing instructions like that used by the system routine GraphicsString (see location 49462/$C136 for more information). The format for this command block is: .byte 15 ;command number .word String—Pointer ;address of the graphics command string DBGETFILES (16) opens a file-selection window. This is a window on the left side of the dialog box that contains a list of all of the files that match the type specifications which are passed to the routine. If a permanent filename is specified in the conunand, only files whose own permanent filenames match the one specified will be displayed. Otherwise, all files will be displayed. If there are more names than can fit in the window, the user can see the rest of the names by pressing the scroll arrows that appear under the box. The format for this command block is: .byte 16 ;command number .byte Xoffset ;horizontal offset from left of box ; (in bytes) .byte Yoffset ;vertical offset from top of box ; (in pixels) In addition, several pieces of information are passed to this command in the zero-page pseudoregisters before DoDIgBox is called: 292 Page 306

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: RenameFUe Renames the file whose old name is contained in the zero-terminated text string pointed to by r6 with the new name contained in the zero-terminated text string pointed to by rO. 293
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49753
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C259
man: Page 307

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: InltForlO Part of the GEOS Operating System program is stored iit the RAM that lies beneath the BASIC ROM at location 40960 ($A000), the I/O registers at location 53248 ($D000), and the Kemal ROM at location 57344 ($E000). Therefore, most of the time, the memory configuration register at location 1 is set to a value of 48 ($30), which gives the system 64K of RAM, and no ROM or I/O registers. When an application needs to use the I/O registers or the Kemal ROM routines, it needs to stop all interrupts, and to change the memory configuration register so that the system can access the I/O and ROM. This routine performs those functions. 49759 $C25F DoneWlthIO After the application has finished accessing I/O and system ROM, this routine restores interrupts, and resets the memory map back to 64K of RAM. 49762 $C262 DShlftRlght Shifts the contents of the pseudoregister whose address is passed in the X register arithmetically to the right by the number of places indicated by the contents of the Y register. 49765 $C265 CopySlrlng Copies a text string that ends in a zero byte to another location The address of the source string is contained in the zero-page pseudoregister indicated by the X register, and the destination address is contained in the pseudoregister indicated by the Y register. 49768 $C268 CopyFStrlng Copies a text string of a fixed length to another location The address of the source string is contained in the zero-page pseudoregister indicated by the X register, the destination address is contained in the pseudoregister indicated by the Y register, and the length of the string is passed in the accumulator. 49771 $C26B CmpStrlng Compares a text string that ends in a zero byte with another such string The address of the first string is contained in the zero-page pseudoregister indicated by the X register, and the address of the second string is contained in the pseudoregister indicated by the Y register. Upon completion, the status register Z flag is set if ihe two strings are equal, and the N flag is set if the first nonmatching character of the first string was lower in value than that of the second string. 294
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49756
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C25C
man: Page 308

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: CmpFStrlng Compares two fixed-length text strings The address of the first string is contained in the zero-page pseudoregister indicated by the X register, the address of the second string is contained in the pseudoregister indicated by the Y register, and the length of the strings is passed in the acciunulator. Upon completion, the status register Z flag is set if the two strings are equal, and the N flag is set if the first nonmatching character of the first string was lower in value than that of the second string. 49777 $C271 Firstlnlt 49780 $C274 OpenRecordFile Opens the existing VLIR file whose name is contained in the zeroterminated text string pointed to by rO for access. 49783 $C277 CloseRecordFlle Calls UpdateRecordFile and sets an internal variable to show that there are no VLIR files currently open 49786 $C27A NextRecord Advances the VLIR current record pointer to the next record 49789 $C27D PrevlousRecord Moves the VLIR current record pointer back to the previous record 49792 $C280 PolntRecord Moves the VLIR current record pointer directly to the record indicated by the contents of the accumulator 49795 $C283 DeleteRecord Deletes the current record, and moves the current record pointer to the record following the one deleted 49798 $C286 InsertRecord 49801 $C289 AppendRecord 49804 $C28C ReadRecord Reads the current record (up to a maximum of r2 bytes) into the RAM buffer whose address is pointed to by r7 49807 $C28F WriteRecord Writes r2 bytes from the RAM buffer whose address is pointed to by r7 to the current record, deleting the old contents of the record 295
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49774
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C26E
man: Page 309

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: SetNextFree Used to find the first free sector on disk after track r3L and sector r3H 49813 $C295 UpdateRecordFile Updates the VLIR file IndexTable, the time and date stamp in the Directory Entry, and the Block Allocation Map. 49816 $C298 GetPtrCurDkNm Returns the address of the name of the current disk in the zero-page pseudoregister pointed to by the X register. 49819 $C29B PromptOn Displays the cursor that was set up with InitTextPrompt at the horizontal position indicated by the variable stringX (33982/$84BE) and the vertical position indicated by stringY (33984/$84C0). 49822 $C29E PromptOff Turns off the text cursor 49825 $C2A1 OpenDisk Used after SetDevice to initialize the disk drive for reading or writing to disk. This routine reads the disk name into DrACurDkNm or DrBCurDkNm, sets r5 to point to the disk name, places the disk's directory header in curDirHead, and sets the isGEOS flag to show that the disk is a GEOS disk. 49828 $C2A4 DoInlineReturn Common return for inline routines. 49831 $C2A7 GetNextChar Returns the next character from the keyboard input buffer in the accumulator, or zero if no character is waiting. 49834 $C2AA BltmapCUp Displays a portion of the bitmap object pointed to by rO The top left comer of the object is positioned at the horizontal byte boundary rlL (0-39) and the scan line rlH. The width of the display in bytes (0-39) is passed in r2L, and the height in scan lines in r2H. The horizontal offset — expressed as the number of bytes of each line that should be skipped before printing the image in the window — is passed in rllL, and the number of bytes that remain unprinted at the end of each line is passed in rllH. The vertical offset is passed in rl2 as the number of scan lines to skip before displaying the object. 296
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49810
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C292
man: Page 310

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: FlndBAMBit 49840 $C2B0 SelDevice Turns over the serial bus to the device whose device number is passed in the accumulator. The global variables curDevice and curDrive are updated, and any errors are returned in the X register. n 49843 $C2B3 IsMselnRegion Tests whether the mouse pointer is within the region whose upper left comer is r3, r2L and whose lower right comer is r4, r2H. If the pointer is within the region, the accumulator contains a nonzero value on return. 49846 $C2B6 ReadByte 49849 $C2B9 FreeBlock 49852 $C2BC ChangeDlskDevlce 49855 $C2BF RstrFrmDlolog Exits from the dialog box routine, restoring system variables and the screen If one of the system icons was used to exit the dialog, the icon number is retumed in rOL. 49858 $C2C2 Panic This is the default routine that is called when a BRK instmction is encountered. It opens a dialog box that displays the address of the BRK, and then quits. 49861 $C2C5 BitOtherClip Uses the input routine pointed to by rl3 (usually ReadByte) to read ^ in a Count/Bitmap group of compacted bitmap object data to the i ( 134-byte buffer pointed to by rO. Once the buffer has the compacted data in it, the routine uncompacts and displays the object. The top left comer of the object is positioned at the horizontal byte boundary pl rlL (0-39) and the scan line rlH. The width of the display in bytes (0-39) is passed in r2L, and the height in scan lines in r2H. The horizontal offset — expressed as the number of bytes of each line that should be skipped before printing the image in the window — is passed in rllL, and the number of bytes that remain unprinted at the end of each line is passed in rllH. The vertical offset is passed in rl2 as the number of scan lines to skip before displaying the object. After the clipped bitmap is displayed, BitOtherClip calls the subroutine pointed to by rl4. This subroutine should reload rO with the address of the buffer. 297 n
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49837
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C2AD
man: Page 311

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: StashRAM 49867 $C2CB FetchRAM 49870 $C2CE SwapRAM 49873 $C2D1 VerifyRAM 49876 $C2D4 DoRAMOp Location Range: 53248-57343 ($D000$DFFF) 4K GEOS code or I/O space Location Range:. 57344-65151 ($E000$FE7F) 8K GEOS code or 64 Kernal ROM Location Range: 65152-65529 ($FE80$FFF9) MOUSE-BASE GEOS input driver The input device is the device used to move the mouse pointer around the screen. The default device used for this purpose is a joystick, or a mouse that emulates a joystick. The program that reads the input device and reports the results to GEOS is located here. If GEOS is to use an input device other than the joystick, a new program that can read that specific device and report the results to GEOS must be placed here instead of the default joystick handler. Any such device must support three basic functions. The first nine bytes of this location range are used for a jump table, which provides fixed entry points for each of these routines. 65152 $FE80 InltMouse InitMouse performs whatever initialization the device requires, and sets the variables mouseXPosition (58/$3A), mouse YPosition (60/$3C), and mouseData (34053/$8505) to their initial values. 298
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 49864
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $C2C8
man: Page 312

---
