# Memory Page 255

nome: CINT
descrizione: Initialize Screen Editor and VIC-Chip This is a documented Kemal routine whose entry in the jump table is located at 65409 ($FF81). The start of the routine appears to be a patch that was added to later versions of the Kemal. It first calls the old routine at 58648 ($E518). This initializes the VIC-II chip to the default values, sets the keyboard as the input device and the screen as the output device, initializes the cursor flash variables, builds the screen line link table, clears the screen, and homes the cursor. The new code then checks the VIC intermpt register to see if the conditions for a Raster Compare IRQ have been fulfilled. Since the Raster Register was initialized to 311, that can only occur when using a PAL system (NTSC screens do not have that many scan lines). The PAL/NTSC register at 678 ($2A6) is set on the basis of the outcome of this test. The CIA #1 Timer A is then set to cause an IRQ interrupt every sixtieth of a second, using the prescaler figures for a PAL or NTSC system, as appropriate. 65390 $FF6E End of Routine to Set Timer for Sixtieth of a Second IRQ This appears to be a patch added to compensate for the extra length of the current version of this routine, which chooses either the PAL or NTSC prescaler values for the timer. 65408 $FF80 Kernal Version Identifier Byte This last byte before the jump table can be used to identify the version of the Kemal. The first version has a 170 ($AA) stored here. 242
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 65371
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $FF5B
man: Page 256 the next version 0, and the most current version at the time of this writing has a 3 in this location. The portable SX-64 has a value of 67 ($43) at this location. The PET 64, a one-piece version with an integrated monochrome display, has an ID byte of 100 ($64). Commodore 64 Logo uses this byte to recognize the PET 64, and adjust its display accordingly. Location Range: 65409-65525 ($FF81-$FFF5) Kemal Jump Table The following jump table is provided by Commodore in an effort to maintain stable entry points for key I/O routines. Each three-byte table entry consists of a 6510 JMP instruction and the actual address of the routine in the ROM. Although the actual address of the routine may vary from machine to machine, or change in later versions of the Kemal, these addresses will stay where they are. By jumping to the entry point provided by this table, rather than directly into the ROM, you insure your programs against changes in the Operating System. In addition, this jump table may help you write programs that will function on more than one Commodore machine. The 15 table entries from 65472-65514 ($FFCO-$FFEA) are the same for all Commodore machines, from the earliest PET on. As an additional aid, some of these routines are also vectored through the table which starts at 788 ($314). Since this table is in RAM, you can change those vectors to point to your own routines which support additional I/O devices. Programs that use the jump table entry points to the I/O routines will be able to use these I/O devices without a problem. The following table will give the entry point, routine name, RAM vector if any, its current address, and a brief summary of its function. 65409 ($FF81) CIN f (65371, $FF5B) initialize screen editor and video chip 65412 ($FF84) lOINIT (64931, $FDA3) initialize I/O devices 65415 ($FF87) RAMTAS (64848, $FD50) initialize RAM, tape buffer, screen 65418 ($FF8A) RESTOR (64789, $FD15) restore default I/O vectors 65421 ($FF8D) VECTOR (64794, $FD1A) read/set I/O vector table 65424 ($FF90) SETMSG (65048, $FE18) set Kemal message control flag 65427 ($FF93) SECOND (60857, $EDB9) send secondary address after LISTEN 243 Page 257 65430 65430 ($FF96) TKSA (60871, $EDC7) send secondary d-dd^sss dft^i* TAT .I'C 65433 ($FF99) MEMTOP (65061, $FE25) read/set top of memory pointer 65436 ($FF9C) MEMBOT (65076, $FE34) read/set bottom of memory pointer 65439 ($FF9F) SCNKEY (60039, $EA87) scan the keyboard 65442 ($FFA2) SETTMO (65057, $FE21) set time-out flag for IEEE bus 65445 ($FFA5) ACPTR (60947, $EE13) input byte from serial bus 65448 ($FFA8) CIOUT (60893, $EDDD) output byte to serial bus 65451 ($FFAB) UNTLK (60911, $EDEF) command serial bus device to UNTALK 65454 ($FFAE) UNLSN (60926, $EDFE) command serial bus device to UNLISTEN 65457 ($FFB1) LISTEN (60684, $ED0C) command serial bus device to LISTEN 65460 ($FFB4) TALK (60681, $ED09) command serial bus device to TALK 65463 ($FFB7) READST (65031, $FE07) read I/O status word 65466 ($FFBA) SETLFS (65024, $FE00) set logical file parameters 65469 ($FFBD) SETNAM (65017, $FDF9) set filename parameters 65472 ($FFC0) OPEN (VIA 794 ($31A) TO 62282, $F34A) open a logical file 65475 ($FFC3) CLOSE (VIA 796 ($31C) TO 62097, $F291) close a logical file 65478 ($FFC6) CHKIN (VIA 798 ($31E) TO 61966, $F20E) define an input channel 65481 ($FFC9) CHKOUT (VIA 800 ($320) TO 62032, $F250) define an output channel 65484 ($FFCC) CLRCHN (VIA 802 ($322) TO 62259, $F333) restore default devices 65487 ($FFCF) CHRIN (VIA 804 ($324) TO 61783, $F157) input a character 65490 ($FFD2) CHROUT (VIA 806 ($326) TO 61898, $F1CA) output a character 244 Page 258

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Non-Maskable Interrupt Hardware Vector This vector points to the main NMI routine at 65091 ($FE43). 65532 $FFFC System Reset (RES) Hardware Vector This vector points to the power-on routine at 64738 ($FCE2). 65534 $FFFE Maskable Interrupt Request and Break Hardware Vectors This vector points to the main IRQ handler routine at 65352 ($FF48). 245
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 65530
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $FFFA
man: Page 259 The text on this page is estimated to be only 3.00% accurate □ y a P O u G U Q Page 260 The text on this page is estimated to be only 10.00% accurate diaptez 8 Page 261 The text on this page is estimated to be only 3.00% accurate □ y a P O u G U Q Page 262 GEOS In addition to the standard operating system Kemal in ROM, a new, entirely separate operating system is available for the Commodore 64. This operating system is called GEOS, which stands for Graphics Environment Operating System. A disk-based program, GEOS can be used on any 64 with a disk drive. The newest model of the Commodore 64, the 64C, comes With a GEOS disk. From the user's standpoint, GEOS provides a friendly new operating environment, featuring pull-down menus, icons, multiple text fonts, dialog boxes, a screen pointer that can be driven by mouse or joystick, support for a variety of printers, a desktop-type disk management system, and a disk speedup system. For programmers, GEOS offers a rich set of standardized routines that allow them to incorporate all of the features listed above into their own programs, as well as providing a complete library of bitmapped graphics, math, string-handling, and fast disk I/O routines. Not only does GEOS offer routines that a program may call the way it does the standard ROM Kemal routines; it offers a framework in which to use these routines as well. Programming a GEOS application is very different from what the 64 programmer has come to expect. If a programmer isn't using GEOS, he or she is responsible for organizing the entire program structure: figuring out how to get the input from the user, and what to do when that input is received; figuring out the timing of each action, and where each part of the program fits in with every other part. But vwth GEOS, a substantial part of the application's structure is already provided for the programmer. When GEOS loads and runs a program, it calls the program's initialization routine (which is always at memory location 1024 ($400) ). After the program has initialized, execution returns once more to GEOS. At that point, the only programs that are rurming are the GEOS Main Loop and the GEOS Interrupt Handler. The GEOS interrupt code replaces the normal 64 Kemal IRQ handler which updates the software clock, flashes the cursor, and checks the keyboard for input (see the entries for location 59953 ($EA31) on pages 219-20 and location 788-789 ($314-$315) on page 73). Like the 64 Interrupt Handler, this code interrupts the normal program every 1 /60 second in order to take care of housekeeping chores (although GEOS uses raster interrupts to initiate the 249 Page 263 interrupt routines, instead of the timer interrupts used by the old 64 operating system). The GEOS version of the handler checks the keyboard and buffers its input, checks the mouse input device for movement and/or button presses, decrements the process timers (more about them later), and moves the mouse pointer and sprites. It also sets system flags that tell the Main Loop whether or not there has been any input. By checking the input information that it receives from the Interrupt Handler, the Main Loop can do its job, which is to determine if any significant events have occurred, and to dispatch the code to handle those events if necessary. For example, if it finds that the mouse button has been clicked, it checks to see if the mouse was positioned over an icon, a menu bar, or a menu item. If it is positioned in such a spot when the button is pressed, an event has occurred — either an icon has been selected, a menu has been opened, or a menu item has been selected. For any of these events, the Main Loop calls a user-supplied subroutine that performs whatever action should be taken when tHe icon or menu item is selected. If the mouse button is not over an icon or menu, the Main Loop calls a user-supplied routine that handles an otherwise insignificant mouse button click. In the same way, the Main Loop calls user-supplied routines when other significant events happen, such as a key being pressed on the keyboard, or a process timer counting down to zero. This allows the progranuner to create what is called an event-driven application. Most programs are structured so that they wait for the user to give them some input, and then react to that input. GEOS takes over the jobs of looking for the input and interpreting what it means. As a result, all the programmer has to do is to write the initiaUzation code that sets up menus, or icons, or processes, and the service routines that respond when GEOS has determined that the icon or menu has been selected. Although for many applications, this event-driven scheme will be sufficient, there are some cases where the programmer will want to insert code into either the Main Loop or Interrupt Handler. GEOS provides hooks for those cases. If you want a routine to be executed before the regular interrupt code, all you have to do is place the address of that routine at the location named interruptTopVector, and end the routine by jumping through the old vector that was stored there. If you want to insert a routine that executes after the regular interrupt handler, you can place the address of that routine at the location named interruptBottomVector. And if you have a subroutine that you want to run as part of the Main Loop, all you have to do is to store its address in the location labeled applicationMain. For tasks that must be performed periodically, according to a fixed schedule, GEOS provides time-based processes. These are sub250 Page 264 routines which the user can specify to be run after a certain number of interrupts have elapsed. They are set up just by placing the addresses of each subroutine in a table, along with a number indicating how many interrupts to wait before calling that subroutine. Each time the process timer counts down to zero, the subroutine will execute, and the timer will be reset to start the process all over again. GEOS also provides a way to suspend process execution. The Price of GEOS There is, of course, a price for all of the additional features that GEOS offers. For one thing, GEOS is a RAM-based operating system. Once it is loaded from the disk, it resides in an area of memory that under the old 64 operating system would be available for program code and/or data. GEOSredaces the sting of this somewhat by placing most of its code in the less accessible areas of the 64 — the RAM that is addressed at the same locations as the BASIC and Kemal ROMs, and 1/0 space. And, the provision of disk turbo routines makes it easier to use program overlays, a scheme whereby the program brings in additional routines from disk files as they are needed. But still, less than 24K of free RAM remains reserved exclusively for the use of application programs under GEOS. Another potential problem area is compatibility with older 64 software. It's highly unlikely that pre- G'£C5 software will confine itself to the area that GEOS allocates for application programs. This means that such programs are likely to use some or all of the RAM occupied by GEOS. GEOS does its best to accommodate such programs. It provides an Old €64 icon on the deskTop with the name of the file printed underneath for each file on a non-G£'05disk. When the user double-clicks on that icon, GEOS checks the load address and file size of the program. If the program does not extend past location 32768 ($8000) in memory, GfOJuses its disk hirbo fast load routines to load the program. GEOS also does its best to automatically run the program once it is loaded. But since non-G£'05 programs make no provisions for returning to the deskTop, and are Ukely to overwrite GEOS RAM, making such a return impossible, the only way to get back to GEOS after running an old 64 application is to reboot the system disk. GEOS\s, structured so that to a large extent, the programmer need not be concerned with the details of how every routine works internally. The programmer should not rely on the absolute addresses of system routines except as entered in the jump table, since GEOS is not fixed in ROM, and is therefore subject to change. In fact, in the first few months since its introduction, revisions have already been made. So the following memory map is presented with a caution: Do not rely absolutely on the addresses shown. Although they seem to be correct for the current version (1.2) of GEOS, Berkeley 251 Page 265 2 GEOS Softworks has stated that they are likely to change in future versions. For example, it is quite probable that additions will be made to the system jump table at location 49408 ($C100). Keeping this warning in mind, however, you should still find the GEOS memory map included in this volume worthwhile. While some of the locations discussed below may change, the GEOS programnung principles presented in the discussion of those locations should prove helpful no matter what version of GEOS you are using. System Hardware Configuration Since the 64 hardware can be configured to use RAM and ROM memory in several different ways, it's useful to describe the particular configuration used by GEOS. Most of the time, GEOS sets location 1 to a value of 48 ($30). This sets up a system with 64K of RAM, instead of the default configuration of 8K BASIC ROM, 8K Kemal ROM, 4K I/O registers, ajid 44K RAM. Location 56576 ($DDOO) determines which of the four 16K banks of memory the VIC II display chip will address. GEOS sets this location to select bank 2, at 32768-49151 ($8000-$BFFF). Location 53272 ($D018) determines where the character ROM and the screen memory used by GEOS' bitmapped display will be located. The default value used by GEOS is 132, which sets the video display RAM to the 8000-byte area starting with location 40960 ($A000), and the Character Dot Data area to 36864 ($9000), where it will not interfere with the bitmapped display. GEOS Memory Map Location Range: 2-127 ($2-$7F) GEOS zero page Under GEOS, this portion of memory is used for GEOS zero-page variables, rather than for BASIC zero-page storage as in the normal 64 configuration. Location Range: 2-33 ($2-$21) Fseudoregisters r0-rl5 Since the 6502 has only three eight-bit registers for the programmer to use, the GEOS system uses part of zero-page memory to create a number of pseudoregisters. Though these registers don't have the versatility and speed of real registers, they perform many of the same functions. GEOS uses them to pass arguments between system routines, and for general temporary storage; Since these locations are used both by interrupt-level code and the Main Loop, their contents are saved at the beginning of the Interrupt Handler routine, and restored when the routine returns from the interrupt. 252 Page 266

---
