# Memory Page 2

nome: BUF
descrizione: BASIC Line Editor Input Buffer When you are in the BASIC immediate mode, and type in a line of characters, those characters are stored here. BASIC then scans the string of characters, converts the text to tokenized BASIC program format, and either stores it or executes the line, depending on whether or not it started with a line number. This same area is also used to store data which is received via the INPUT and GET commands. This explains why these commands are illegal in immediate mode — they must use the same buffer space that is required by the immediate mode statement itself. It is interesting to note that this buffer is 89 bytes long. The screen editor will allow a maximum of only 80 characters in a program line, with one extra byte required for a 0 character, marking the end of the line. This presumably is a carry-over from the VIC, /— I which allows a line length of up to 88 characters. The last eight > _ ' bytes of this buffer are therefore normally not used, and can be considered free space for the programmer to use as he or she sees fit. n Location Range: 601-630 ($259-$276) Tables for File Nunibers, Device Numbers, and Secondary Addresses Pj All three of the tables here have room for ten one-byte entries, each of which represents an active Input/Output file. When an I/O file is opened, its logical file number is put into the table at 601 ($259), the 51 ! I n
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 512-600
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $200-$258
man: Page 65

---

nome: LAT
descrizione: Kernal Table of Active Logical File Numbers 611-620 $263-$26C FAT Kernal Table of Device Numbers for Each Logical File 621-630 $26D-$276 SAT Kernal Table of Secondary Addresses for Each Logical File 631-640 $277-$280 KEYD Keyboard Buffer (Queue) This buffer, sometimes also referred to as the keyboard queue, holds the ASCII values of the characters entered from the keyboard. The interrupt routine which scans the keyboard deposits a character here each time a key is pressed. When BASIC sees that there are characters waiting, it removes and prints them, one by one, in the order in which they were entered. This kind of a buffer is known as FIFO, for First In, First Out. The buffer will hold up to ten characters, allowing you to type faster than the computer prints characters, without losing characters. The maximum number of characters this buffer can hold at one time is ten (as determined by the value at 649, $289). Characters entered after the buffer is full will be ignored. The commands GET and INPUT retrieve characters from this buffer. If one of these is executed while there are already characters waiting in the buffer, those characters will be fetched as if they were part of the data being input. To prevent this from happening, you can clear the buffer by POKEing a 0 into location 198 ($C6), which holds the number of characters that are waiting in the buffer. 52
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 601-610
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $259-$262
man: Page 66 631-640 One of the most interesting and useful techniques for programming Commodore computers is to have a program simulate direct entry of commands from the keyboard. This dynamic keyboard trick is achieved by first POKEing PETASCII characters, usually cursor movement characters and carriage returns, into the buffer, and setting location 198 ($C6) to show how many characters are waiting in the buffer. Next, you clear the screen, and PRINT the statements that you wish to have executed on the screen, carefully positioning them so that the first statement to be entered is on the fourth line of the screen. You then home the cursor and execute an END statement. This causes the keyboard buffer to be read, and the carriage returns to be executed, thus entering the printed lines as if they had been typed in immediate or direct mode. The program can be continued by including a GOTO statement in the last line entered. Many interesting effects can be achieved using this method. Examples of a few of these are included below. For example, program lines can be added, modified, or deleted, while the program is running. The following example shows how this is done: 10 REM THIS LINE WILL BE DELETED 20 REM A NEW LINE 30 WILL BE CREATED 40 PRINT CHR$ (147 ): PRINT: PRINT 50 PRINT "80 LIST": PRINT" 30 REM THIS LINE WASN'T H ERE BEFORE" 60 PRINT "10":PRINT "GOTO 80"CHR$(19) 70 FOR 1=631 TO 634:POKE I, 13 :NEXT:POKE 198,4:END 80 REM THIS LINE WILL BE REPLACED You can use this technique to enter numbered DATA statements automatically, using values in memory. These statements become a permanent part of the program. Another interesting application is taking ASCII program lines from a tape data file, or sequential disk fUe, and having them entered automatically. This can be used for merging programs, or for transferring programs between computers with a modem and a terminal program. To create the ASCII program file, you use CMD to direct a LISTing to the desired device as follows: For tape: OPEN 1,1,1,"ASCII":CMD 1:LIST After the listing has ended: PRINT #1:CL0SE 1 For disk: OPEN 8,8,8,"ASCII,S,W":CMD 8:LIST After the listing has ended: PRINT#8:CL0SE 8 This file can then be uploaded using a modem and appropriate terminal software, entered by itself or merged with another program by using the following program. Be sure to save this program before you run it, because it will erase itself when it is done. 53 Page 67

---

nome: MEMSTR
descrizione: Pointer: O.S. Start of Memory When the power is first turned on, or a cold start RESET is performed, the Kemal routine RAMTAS (64848, $FD50) sets this location to point to address 2048 ($800). This indicate that this is the starting address of user RAM. BASIC uses this location to set its own start of memory pointer at location 43 ($2B), and thereafter uses only its own pointer. The Kemal routine MEMBOT (65076, $FE34) may be used to read or set this pointer, or these locations may be directly PEEKed or POKEd from BASIC. 643-644 $282-$284 MEMSIZ Pointer: O.S. End of Memory When the power is first turned on, or a cold start RESET is performed, the Kemal routine RAMTAS (64848,$FD50) performs a nondestmctive test of RAM from 1024 ($400) up, stopping when the test 54
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 641-642
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $281-$282
man: Page 68

---

nome: TIMOUT
descrizione: Flag: Kernal Variable for IEEE Time-Out This location is used only with the external IEEE interface card (which was not yet available from Commodore at the time of writing). For more information, see the entry for the Kernal SETTMO routine at 65057 ($FE21). 646 $286 COLOR Current Foreground Color for Text The process of PRINTing a character to the screen consists of both placing the screen code value for the character in screen memory and placing a foreground color value in the corresponding location in color RAM. Whenever a character is PRINTed, the Operating System fetches the value to be put in color RAM from this location. The foreground color may be changed in a number of ways. Pressing the CTRL or Commodore logo key and numbers 1-8 at the same time will change the value stored here, and thus the color being printed. PRINTing the PETASCII equivalent character with the CHR$ command will have the same effect. But probably the easiest method is to POKE the color value directly to this location. The table below lists the possible colors that may be produced, and shows how to produce them using all three methods. POKE COLOR* COLOR CHR$ KEYS TO PRESS 0 BLACK 144 CTRL-1 1 WHITE 5 CTRL-2 2 RED 28 CTRL-3 3 CYAN 159 CTRL-4 4 PURPLE 156 CTRL-5 5 GREEN 30 CTRL-6 6 BLUE 31 CTRL-7 7 YELLOW 158 CTRL-8 8 ORANGE 129 Logo-1 55
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 645
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $285
man: Page 69

---

nome: GDCOL
descrizione: Color of Character under Cursor This location is used to keep track of the original color code of the character stored at the present cursor location. Since the blinking cursor uses the current foreground color at 646 ($286), the original value must be stored here so that if the cursor moves on without changing that character, its color code can be restored to its original value. 648 $288 HIBASE Top Page of Screen Memory This location contains the value used by the Operating System routines that print to the screen as the base address for screen RAM. The top of screen memory can be found by multiplying this location by 256. The default value for screen RAM is set on pov^rer-up to location 1024 ($400), and this location therefore usually contains a 4. Screen display memory on the Commodore 64 can be moved to start on any IK boundary (location evenly divisible by 1024). This is done by manipulating the VIC-II memory control register at 53272, ($D018), and the VIC chip memory bank select at location 56576 ($DDOO). It is important to note, however, that while any area may be displayed, the Operating System will look here to find out where it should PRINT characters. Therefore, if you change the screen location by altering the contents of one of the two addresses listed above, the Operating System will still not know where to PRINT characters unless you also change this address as well. The result [ { will be that characters entered from the keyboard or PRINTed will not appear on the screen. Examples of how to properly relocate the screen can be found at \ I the entries for location 53272 ($D018) and 43 ($25). ^ Since the PRINT command in essence just POKEs a lot of values to screen and color memory, by changing this pointer you can print a string of characters to memory locations other than screen RAM. For example, you could PRINT a sprite shape to memory without 56 U U
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 647
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $287
man: Page 70

---

nome: XMAX
descrizione: j I Maximum Keyboard Buffer Size The value here indicates the maximum number of characters that the keyboard buffer at 631 ($277) may hold at any one time. Anytime fj that the current buffer length in location 198 ($C6) matches the value here, further ke)^resses will be ignored. Although the maximum size of the keyboard buffer is usually 10 characters, it may be possible to extend it to up to 15 characters by changing the number here. This could cause the Operating System pointers to the bottom and top of memory at 641-644 ($281-$284) to be overwritten, but no real harm should result. 57
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 649
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $289
man: Page 71

---

nome: RPTFLG
descrizione: i i Flag: Which Keys Will Repeat? ^ The flag at this location is used to determine whether to continue printing a character as long as its key is held down, or whether to ( / wait until the key is let up before allowing it to be printed again. * — > The default value here is 0, which allows only the cursor movement keys, insert/delete key, and the space bar to repeat. I , POKEing this location with 128 ($80) will make all keys repeat- I ! ing, while a value of 64 ($40) will disable all keys from repeating. 651 $28B KOUNT Counter for Timing the Delay Between Key Repeats This location is used as a delay counter to determine how long to wait while a key is being held down until the next repeat printing of that key. The value here starts at 6. If location 652 ($28C) contains a 0, the value in this location is counted down once every 1 /60 second, so long as the same key is held down. When this counter gets to 0, and if the repeat flag at 650 ($28A) allows that key to repeat, its ASCII equivalent will once again be placed in the keyboard buffer. A value of 4 is then placed in location 651, allowing subsequent repeats to occur at a rate of 15 per second. 652 $28C DELAY Counter fot Timing the Delay Until the First Key Repeat Begins This location is used as a delay counter to determine how long a key must be held down before the entry of that key should be repeated. The initial value of 16 is counted down every 1/60 second, as long as the same key remains pressed. When the value gets to 0, location 651 ($28B) is counted down from 6, and the key is repeated when the value there reaches 0. Thus a total of 22/60, or approximately 1/3, second will elapse before the first repeat of a key. The value here will be held to 0 after the first repeat, so that subsequent , j keystroke repetitions occur much more quickly. I i 653 $28D SHFLAG Flag: SHIFT/CTRL/Logo Keypresss |_J This flag signals which of the SHIFT, CTRL, or Commodore logo keys are currently being pressed, if any. A value of 1 signifies that one of the SHIFT keys is being I ) pressed, a 2 shows that the Commodore logo key is down, and 4 — ' means that the CTRL key is being pressed. If more than one key is held down, these values will be added; for example, a 3 indicates that SHIFT and logo are both held down. The value here is used by the Operating System when 58 U U
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 650
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $28A
man: Page 72

---

nome: LSTSHF
descrizione: Last Pattern of SHIFT/CTRL/Logo Keypress This location is used in combination with the one above to debounce the special SHIFT keys. This will keep the SHIFT/logo combination from changing character sets back and forth during a single pressing of both keys. 655-656 $28F-$290 KEYLOG Vector to Keyboard Table Setup Routine This location points to the address of the Operating System routine which actually determines which keyboard matrix lookup table wall be used. The routine looks at the value of the SHIFT flag at 653 ($28D), and based on what value it finds there, stores the address of the cor(— I rect table to use at location 245 ($F5). i I The interrupt driven keyboard-scanning routine jumps through this RAM vector to get to the table setup routine. Therefore, it is possible to alter the address contained in this vector, and direct the keyscan routine to your own routine, which can check the keypress and SHIFT combination, and act before a character is printed. Since this routine comes after the keypress, but before it is printed, this is a very good place to have your preprocessor routine check for a particular keypress. An excellent example of such a program is the "VICword" program by Mark Niggemann, COMPUTEI's Second Book of VIC. This program adds a machine language routine that checks if the SHIFT or Commodore logo key is pressed while not in quote mode. If it finds one of these keypresses, it substitutes an entire BASIC keyword for the letter (A-Z) of the key that was pressed. 59
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 654
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $28E
man: Page 73 655-656 u An adaptation of that program for the 64 appears below. 100 IP PEEK(PEEK(56)*256)<>120THENPOKE56,PEEK(56)1:CLR 110 HI=PEEK(56) :BASE=HI*256 j j 120 PRINTCHR$( 147) "READING DATA" 130 FOR AD=0 TO 211: READ BY 140 POKE BASE+AD,BY:NEXT AD , i 150 : . i ! 200 REM RELOCATION ADJUSTMENTS 210 POKE BASE+26,HI:POKE BASE+81,HI 220 POKE BASE+i23,HI:POKE BASE+133,HI 230 : 240 PRINT CHR$(147) TAB(15) "***64W0RD***" :PRINT 250 PRINT"T0 TOGGLE THE PROGR/VM ON/OFF: ": PRINT: PRI NT: PRINT "SYS" ; BASE; 260 PRINT CHR$(145) ;CHR$(145) ; 270 DATA 120,173,143,2,201,32 280 DATA 208,12,169,220,141,143 290 DATA 2,169,72,141,144,2 300 DATA 88,96,169,32,141,143 310 DATA 2,169,0,141,144,2 320 DATA 88,96,165,212,208,117 330 DATA 173,141,2,201,3,176 340 DATA 110,201,0,240,106,169 350 DATA 194,133,245,169,235,133 360 DATA 246,165,215,201,193,144 370 DATA 95,201,219,176,91,56 380 DATA 233,193,174,141,2,224 390 DATA 2,208,3,24,105,26 400 DATA 170,189,159,0,162,0 410 DATA 134,198,170,160,158,132 420 DATA 34,160,160,132,35,160 430 DATA 0,10,240,16,202,16 440 DATA 12,230,34,208,2,230 450 DATA 35,177,34,16,246,48 460 DATA 241,200,177,34,48,17 470 DATA 8,142,211,0,230,198 480 DATA 166,198,157,119,2,174 490 DATA 211,0,40,208,234,230 i , 500 DATA 198,166,198,41,127,157 1 ! 510 DATA 119,2,230,198,169,20 520 DATA 141,119,2,76,72,235 530 DATA 76,224,234 \ j 550 REM TOKENS FOR SHIFT KEY * — ' 570 DATA 153,175,199,135,161,129 580 DATA 141,164,133,137,134,147 , , 590 DATA 202,181,159,151,163,201 LJ 600 DATA 196,139,192,149,150,155 610 DATA 191,138 Page 74

---

nome: MODE
descrizione: Flag: Enable or Disable Changing Character Sets with SHIFT/ Logo Keypress This flag is used to enable or disable the feature which lets you switch between the uppercase/graphics and upper/lowercase character sets by pressing the SHIFT and Commodore logo keys simulta'"1 neously. - ■ This flag affects only this special SHIFT key function, and does not affect the printing of SHIFTed characters. POKEing a value of n 61
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 657
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $291
man: Page 75

---

nome: AUTODN
descrizione: U Flag: Screen Scroll Enabled This location is used to determine whether moving the cursor past the fortieth column of a logical line will cause another physical line to be added to the logical fine. A value of 0 enables the screen to scroll the following lines down in order to add that line; any nonzero value will disable the scroll. This flag is set to disable the scroll temporarily when there are characters waiting in the keyboard buffer (these may include cursor movement characters that would eliminate the need for a scroll). Location Ronge:659-663 ($293-$297) RS-232 Pseudo 6551 Registers For serial Input/Output via the RS-232 port, the internal software of the Commodore 64 emulates the operation of a 6551 UART chip (that's Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter, for you acronym buffs), also known as an ACIA (Asynchronous Communications Interface Adapter). These RAM locations are used to mimic the functions of that chip's hardware command, control, and status registers. Although RAM locations are allocated for mimicking the 655 1's ability to use either an on-board baud rate generator or an external clock crystal, this function is not implemented by the internal software. Provisions have been made for the user to communicate with these registers through the RS-232 OPEN command. When device 2 is opened, a filename of up to four characters may be appended. i j These four characters are copied to locations 659-662 ($293-$296), i i although the last two, which specify a nonstandard baud rate, are not used because that feature is not implemented. ^ 659 $293 M51CTR ^ RS-232: Mock 6551 Control Register This location is used to control the RS-232 serial I/O baud rate j { (speed at which data is transmitted and received), the word length (number of bits per data character), and the number of stop bits used to mark the end of a transmitted character. It uses the same format I ( as that of the 6551 UART control register to set these parameters, al- * — ' though, as you will see, some of the 6551 configurations are not 62 U
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 658
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $292
man: Page 76 659 m I \ n n (—1 r— I i \ n implemented by the software that emulates the UART device. For example, the standard baud rates which are higher than 2400 baud are not implemented, presumably because the software cannot keep up at higher rates. The meanings of the various bit-patterns are as follows: Bit 7: STOP Bits 0 (bit value of 0) =1 STOP Bit 1 (bit value of 128) =2 STOP Bits Bits 6-5: WORD LENGTH 00 (bit value of 0) =8 DATA Bits 01 (bit value of 32) =7 DATA Bits 10 (bit value of 64) =6 DATA Bits 11 (bit value of 96) =5 DATA Bits Bit 4: Unused Bits 3-0: BAUD RATE = Nonstandard (User-Defined) Rate (Not Implemented) =50 Baud = 75 Baud = 110 Baud = 134.5 Baud = 150 Baud =300 Baud =600 Baud = 1200 Baud = 1800 Baud =2400 Baud =3600 Baud (Not Implemented on the Commodore 64) =4800 Baud (Not Implemented on the Commodore 64) = 7200 Baud (Not Implemented on the Commodore 64) =9600 Baud (Not Implemented on the Commodore 64) = 19200 Baud (Not hnplemented on the Commodore 64) This register is the only one which must be set when opening RS232 device (number 2). The first character of the filename will be stored here. For example, the statement OPEN 2,2,0,CHR$(6-l-32) will set the value of tihis location to 38. As you can see from the above chart, this sets up the RS-232 device for a data transfer rate of 300 baud, using seven data bits per character and one stop bit. 63 0000 (bit value of 0) 0001 (bit value of 1) 0010 (bit value of 2) 0011 (bit value of 3) 0100 (bit value of 4) 0101 (bit value of 5) 0110 (bit value of 6) 0111 (bit value of 7) 1000 (bit value of 8) 1001 (bit value of 9) 1010 (bit value of 10) 1011 (bit value of 11) 1100 (bit value of 12) 1101 (bit value of 13) 1110 (bit value of 14) 1111 (bit value of 15) Page 77

---

nome: M51CDR
descrizione: RS-232: Mock 6551 Command Register This location performs the same function as the 6551 UART chip's command register, which specifies type of parity, duplex mode, and handshaking protocol. The type of parity used determines how the 64 will check that RS-232 data is received correctiy. The duplex mode can be either full duplex (the 64 will be able to transmit at the same time it is receiving) or half duplex (it will take turns sending and receiving). The handshaking protocol has to do with the manner in which the sending device lets the receiver know that it is ready to send data, and the receiver lets the sender know that it has gotten the data correctly. The meanings of the bit patterns in this register are as follows: Bits 7-5: Parity XXO (bit value of 0,64,128 or 192) =No Parity Generated or Received 001 (bit value of 32) =Odd Parity Transmitted and Received Oil (bit value of 96) =Even Parity Transmitted and Received 101 (bit value of 160) =Mark Parity Transmitted, None Checked 111 (bit value of 224) = Space Parity Transmitted, None Checked Bit 4: Duplex 0 (bit value of 0) =Full Duplex 1 (bit value of 16) =Half Duplex Bits 3-1: Unused Bit 0: Handshake Protocol 0 (bit value of 0) =3 Line 1 (bit value of 1) =X Line This register can be set at the user's option when opening RS-232 device (number 2). The second character of the filename will be stored here. For example, the statement OPEN 2,2,0,CHR$(6 + 32) -h CHR$(32 + 1 6) will set the value of this location to 48, which is the value of the second character in the filename portion of the statement. As you can see from the above chart, this configures the RS-232 device for half duplex data transfer using odd parity and three-line handshaking. 661-662 $295-$296 M51AJB RS-232: Nonstandard Bit Timing These locations are provided for storing a nonstandard user-defined baud rate, to be used when the low nybble of the control register at 659 ($293) is set to 0. They were presumably provided to conform to 64
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 660
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $294
man: Page 78

---

nome: RSSTAT
descrizione: RS-232: Mock 6551 Status Register The contents of this register indicate the error status of RS-232 data transmission. That status can be determined by PEEKing this location directly, by referencing the BASIC reserved variable ST, or by using the Kernal READST (65031, $FE07) routine. Note that if you use ST or Kernal, this location will be set to 0 after it is read. Therefore, if you need to test more than one bit, make sure that each test preserves the original value, because you won't be able to read it again. The meaning of each Ijit value is specified below: Bit 7: 1 (bit value of 128)=Break Detected Bit 6: 1 (bit value of 64)=DSR (Data Set Ready) Signal Missing Bit 5: Unused Bit 4: 1 (bit value of 16)=CTS (Clear to Send) Signal Missing Bit 3: 1 (bit value of 8)= Receiver Buffer Empty Bit 2: 1 (bit value of 4)=Receiver Buffer Overrun Bit 1: 1 (bit value of 2)= Framing Error Bit 0: 1 (bit value of 1)= Parity Error The user is responsible for checking these errors and taking appropriate action. If, for example, you find that Bit 0 or 1 is set when you are sending, indicating a framing or parity error, you should resend the last byte. If Bit 2 is set, the GET#2 command is not being executed quickly enough to empty the buffer (BASIC should be able to keep up at 300 baud, but not higher). If Bit 7 is set, you will want to stop sending, and execute a GET#2 to see what is being sent. 664 $298 BITNUM RS-232: Number of Bits Left to be Sent/Received This location is used to determine how many zero bits must be added to the data character to pad its length out to the word length specified in 659 ($293).
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 663
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $297
man: Page 79

---

nome: BAUDOF
descrizione: Time Required to Send a Bit This location holds the prescaler value used by CIA #2 timers A and B. These timers cause an NMI interrupt to drive the RS-232 receive and transmit routines CLOCK/PRESCALER times per second each, where CLOCK is the system 02 frequency of 1,022,730 Hz (985,250 if you are using the European PAL television standard rather than the American NTSC standard), and PRESCALER is the value stored at 56580-1 ($DD04-5) and 56582-3 ($DDG6-7), in low-byte, highbyte order. You can use the following formula to figure the correct prescaler value for a particular RS-232 baud rate: PRESCALER=((CLOCK/BAUDRATE)/2)-100 The American (NTSC standard) prescaler values for the standard RS232 baud rates which the control register at 659 ($293) makes available are stored in a table at 65218 ($FEC2), starting with the twobyte value used for 50 baud. The European (PAL standard) version of that table is located at 58604 ($E4EC). Location Range: 667-670 ($29B-$29E) Byte Indices to the Beginning and End of Receive and Transmit Buffers The two 256-byte First In, First Out (FIFO) buffers for RS-232 data reception and transmission are dynamic wraparound buffers. This means that the starting point and the ending point of the buffer can change over time, and either point can be anywhere within the buffer. If, for example, the starting point is at byte 100, the buffer will fill towards byte 255, at which point it will wrap around to byte 0 again. To maintain this system, the following four locations are used as indices to the starting and the ending point of each buffer. 667 $29B RIDBE RS-232: Index to End of Receive Buffer This index points to the ending byte within the 256-byte RS-232 receive buffer, and is used to add data to that buffer. 668 $29C RIDBS RS-232: Index to Start of Receive Buffer This index points to the starting byte within the 256-byte RS-232 receive buffer, and is used to remove data from that buffer. 669 $29D RODBS RS-232: Index to Start of Transmit Buffer This index points to the starting byte within the 256-byte RS-232 transmit buffer, and is used to remove data from that buffer. 66
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 665-666
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $299-$29A
man: Page 80

---

nome: RODBE
descrizione: RS-232: Index to End of Transmit Buffer This index points to the ending byte within the 256-byte RS-232 transmit buffer, and is used to add data to that buffer. 671-672 $29F-$2A0 IR€LTMP Save Area for IRQ Vector During Cassette I/O The routines that read and write tape data are driven by an IRQ interrupt. In order to hook one of these routines into the interrupt, the RAM IRQ vector at 788-789 ($314-$315) must be changed to point to the address at which it starts. Before that change is made, the old IRQ vector address is saved at these locations, so that after the tape I/O is finished, the interrupt that is used for scanning the keyboard, checking the stop key, and updating the clock can be restored. You will note that all of the above functions vdll be suspended during tape I/O. 673 $2A1 ENABL RS-232 Interrupts Enabled This location holds the active NMI interrupt flag byte from CIA #2 Interrupt Control Register (56589, $DDOD). The bit values for this flag are as follows: Bit 4: 1 (bit value of 16) = System is Waiting for Receiver Edge Bit 1: 1 (bit value of 2) = System is Receiving Data Bit 0: 1 (bit value of 1) = System is Transmitting Data 674 $2A2 Indicator of CIA #1 Control Register B Activity During Cassette I/O 675 $2A3 Save Area for CIA #1 Interrupt Control Register During Cassette Read 676 $2A4 Save Area for CIA #1 Control Register A During Cassette Read 677 $2A5 fmm. Temporary Index to the Next 40-CoIumn Line for Screen i \ Scrolling 678 $2A6 PI PAL/NTSC Flag At power-on, a test is performed to see if the monitor uses the NTSC (North American) or PAL (European) television standard. n 67
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 670
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $29E
man: Page 81

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Unused The programmer may use this area for machine language subroutines, or for graphics data storage. If the VIC -II chip is using the bottom 16K for graphics memory (the default setting when the system is turned on), this is one of the few free areas available for storing sprite or character data. Locations 704-767 could be used for sprite data block number 11, without interfering with BASIC program text or variables. Location Range: 768-779 ($300-$30B) BASIC Indirect Vector Table Several important BASIC routines are vectored through RAM. This means that the first instruction executed by the routine is an indirect jump to a location pointed to by one of the vectors in this table. On power-up, the system sets these vectors to point to the next instruction past the original JuMP instruction. The routine then continues with that instruction as if the jump never took place. For example, the BASIC error message routine starts at 42039 ($A437) with the instruction JMP ($300). The indirect vector at 768 ($300) points to 42042 ($A43A), which is the instruction immediately following JMP ($300). Although this may seem like a fancy way of accomplishing ! ] nothing, using these indirect vectors serves two important purposes. First, it allows you to use these important BASIC routines without knowing their address in the BASIC ROM. i l For example, the routine to LIST the ASCII text of the single- * — ' byte BASIC program token that is currently in the Accumulator (.A) is located at one address in the VIC, and another in the 64. On fu- < j ture Commodore computers it may be found at still another location. 1 ! Yet as long as the routine is vectored in RAM at 774 ($306), the statement QP=PEEK(774)+256*PEEK(775) would find the address of that routine on any of the machines. Thus, entering such routines | [ through RAM vectors rather than a direct jump into the ROMs helps 68
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 679-767
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $2A7-$2FF
man: Page 82

---
