# Memory Page 132

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: mouseBottom
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 33977
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $84B9
man: The bottom position to which the mouse pointer may travel 33978-33979 $84BA-$84BB mouseLeft The leftmost position to which the mouse pointer may travel 33980-33981 $84BC-$84BD mouseRlght The rightmost position to which the mouse pointer may travel 33982-33983 $84BE-$84BF strlngX The horizontal position for the current string input 33984 $84C0 stringY The vertical position for the current string input 33985-34048 $84Cl-$8500 mousePicDcrta The place where the actual sprite data for the mouse pointer picture is stored 34049 $8501 maximumMouseSpeed The maximum speed at which the mouse pointer may travel The joystick speed may be a value from 0 to 127. 34050 $8502 minlmumMouseSpeed The minimum speed at which the mouse pointer may travel The joystick speed may be a value from 0 to 127. 34051 $8503 mouseAcceleration The rate at which the mouse speed can accelerate to its maximum speed. 34052 $8504 keyData Buffer that stores the last key pressed The keyVector and other keyboard service routines should get the keypress data from here. 34053 $8505 mouseDota The place where data for the mouse input device service routines is stored This number is negative when the mouse button is pressed, and nonnegative when it is released. 34054-34057 $8506-$8509 inputData A four-byte area where the UpdateMouse routine can store devicespecific information that can be used by application routines. When the joystick is the input device, the first byte of this value indicates 264 GEOS 34076 ' i one of eight stick directions. Starting with 0 at the right-hand position, the values go counterclockwise, so that 1 represents right and up, 2 represents up, 3 up and left, and so on. If the joystick is cen1 [ tered, the value here reads —1. The second byte of this area is used to store the current mouseSpeed for the joystick input device. p 34058-34059 $850A-$850B random - Holds a random number that is incremented during each interrupt 34060-34068 $850C-$8514 saveFontTab GEOS saves the user's active font table here when going into menu display mode. 34069 $8515 dblCUckCount Variable used to determine when the user has double-clicked on an icon It is loaded with a value when the mouse button is pressed while the pointer is over an icon, and this value is decremented during each interrupt. If it has not counted down to zero when the icon is selected again, then the double-click flag in the high byte of pseudoregister rO is set to TRUE when the service routine is called. Otherwise, rO is set to FALSE. 34070 $8516 year The year value for the time of day dock 34071 $8517 month The month value for the time of day clock 34072 $8518 day The day value for the time of day clock n 34073 $8519 hour The hour value for the time of day clock n 34074 $851 A minutes The minutes value for the time of day clock ri 34075 $85 IB seconds The seconds value for the time of day clock i — , 34076 $8510 alarmSetFlag I _ j Variable used to implement the alarm If an alarm is set which GEOS should monitor, this value is set to 255 ($FF). If no alarm is set, the value stored here should be zero. 265 34077 GEOS 34077 $851D sysDBData Variable used internally to indicate which command terminated a dialog, causing a return to the application The default screen colors 34079-34495 $851F-$86BF dlgBoxRamBuf Area used to save all of the system RAM variables that define the state of an application These include zero-page global variables, non-zero-page global variables, and information about menus, processes, and sprites. Location Range: 35328-35839 ($8A00$8BFF) SPRITE_PICS Sprite image data 35328-35391 $8A00-$8A3F sprOpic 35392-35455 $8A40-$8A7F sprlpic 35456-35519 $8A80-$8ABF spr2pic 35520-35583 $8AC0-$8AFF spr3pic 35584-35647 $8B00-$8B3F spr4pic 35648-35711 $8B40-$8B7F spr5plc 35712-35775 $8B80-$8BBF spr6pic 35776-35839 $8BC0-$8BFF spr7pic Location Range: 35840-36823 ($8C00$8FD7) COLOR-MATRIX Video color matrix 36824-36855 $8FD8-$8FF7 GEOS free RAM Location Range: 36856-36863 ($8FF8$8FFF) Sprite shape data pointers (For more information, see location 2040, page 82.) 34078 $851E screencolors 266 Location Range: 40969-48959 ($A000$BF3F) SCREEN-BASE Foreground screen RAM GEOS uses the 64's high-resolution bitmap graphics mode for its display. (See the section about bit 5 of location 53265, pages 131-34, for more information on this mode.) The 16K VIC-II display space is set to bank 2 (32768-49151/$8000-$BFFF), and the top half of that bank is set aside for display data. The contents of the memory in this area determine whether any given dot on the screen is lit up or set to the background color, depending on whether the bit that represents that pixel is set to 1 or 0. Besides the normal display area, GEOS maintains a second display buffer starting at location 24576 ($6000). This buffer holds a duplicate copy of the display data, from which the normal screen display may be recovered after it has been erased by a dialog box or menu. Location Range: 49860-49151 ($BF40$BFFF) GEOS tables Location Range: 49152-53247 ($0000$CFFF) OS_ROM 4K GEOS code, always resident 49152 $C000 BootGEOS The jump vector to the short program used to reboot GEOS This vector is used to restart GEOS by having the user insert the GEOS system disk, as long as the program that calls it has kept the memory area from $C000-$C02F intact. 49155 $C003 ResetHandle The jump vector to the code that initializes GEOS from a cold start Location Range: 49408-49863 ($0100$0207) OS_JUMPTAB GEOS Operating System jump table Just as Commodore maintains a jump table of Kemal routines in order to provide a fixed entry point for certain useful I/O functions, GEOS also maintains a jump table of important GEOS routines. This 49408 GEOS table is organized in exactly the same way as the ROM Kemal jump table that starts at location 65409 ($FF81). Each entry in the table is three bytes long, and consists of the 6510 JMP opcode ($4C), followed by the actual address of the routine, in the normal low-byte, high-byte order. While Commodore includes only a little more than three dozen such routines, GEOS provides over 150. Because of the number of routines, it is not possible to explain all of them here in detail. A brief description of most of the routines is provided to aid the curious in their experimentation. 49408 $C100 InterruptMaIn The main portion of the normal IRQ interrupt handler Users may insert their own routines into the interrupt-handler chain either before or after this routine executes. To insert code in front of this routine, place the address of your interrupt code in the interruptTop Vector (33949/$849D), and end the routine by jumping here, with a JMP $C100 instruction. To insert a user interrupt routine Siat executes after this one, place the address of the routine in interruptBottomVector (33951/$849F), and end it with an RTS instruction. Processes 49411 $C103 InltProcesses Initializes all processes in the process table The processes do not start running, but rather are marked frozen and blocked. The accumulator should contain the total number of processes, and rO should point to the process table. The process table is a data structure that describes a number of timed processes. These are subroutines that are run periodically, at fixed time intervals. They can be used for any short task that must be performed on a regular basis. When a process is initialized, GEOS assigns it a counter and a flag. The GEOS Interrupt Handler subtracts 1 from the counter value during each interrupt (every 1/60 second). When the counter reaches 0, a flag is set to show that the process should be run, and the counter is reset to its original value. The GEOS Main Loop checks the flags for each process every time that the Loop runs. If a process flag shows that it should run, the Main Loop calls the subroutine associated with that process. The process table contains a four-byte entry for each process. The first two bytes give the address of the process subroutine. The next two bytes indicate the interval at which the process is to run, in low-byte, high-byte format. This interval is expressed in the number of interrupts which 'pass before the process runs. These interrupts occur every 1/60 second. Therefore, a value of 60 indicates that the process should run once per second, and a value of 600 means that the process runs once every ten seconds. 268 GEOS 49438 49414 $C106 RestartProcess Used to start a process running This routine marks the process whose number is stored in the X register as unfrozen and unblocked, and resets the process timer to start the process running. 49417 $C109 EnableProcess EnableProcess is used to force the process whose number is stored in the X register to be run dviring the next Main Loop. If the process is blocked or frozen it remains so, and if it is running it is executed once, and its timer is reset. 49420 $C10C BlockProcess This routine sets a flag that blocks the execution of the process whose number is stored in the X register. The process timer continues to count down and reset as normal, but the process is not marked for execution each time that the counter reaches zero. 49423 $C10F UnblockProcess Unblocks the execution of the process whose number is stored in the X register 49426 $ C 1 1 2 FreezeProcess Used to stop the timer of the process whose number is stored in the X register Effectively halts execution of the process, since its timer never counts down to zero. 49429 $C115 UnfreezeProcess Restarts the timer for the process indicated by the contents of the X register, allowing it to count down to zero and execute Graphics 49432 $0118 HorizontalLine Draws a horizontal line from r3,rllL to r4,rllL, using the eightbit line pattern in the accumulator 49435 $C11B InvertLine Inverts all of the bits in the horizontal line between points r3,rllL and r4,rllL 49438 $C11E RecoverLlne Copies the horizontal line between points r3,rllL and r4,rllL on the background screen to the same position on the foreground screen 269 49441 GEOS 49441 $C121 VerticalLlne Draws a vertical line from r4,r3L to r4,r3H using the eight-bit line pattern found in the accumulator 49444 $C124 Rectangle Draws a rectangle from r3,r2L to r4,r3H, and fills it with the current fill pattern (set by SetPattern) 49447 $C127 FrameRectangle Draws the outline of a rectangle from r3,r2L to r4,r3H The outline is one pixel wide, and conforms to the pattern set by the current fill pattern (set by SetPattern). 49450 $C12A InvertRectangle Inverts all of the pixels within the rectangle whose top left corner is defined by the point r3,r2L and whose bottom right corner is the point r4,r3H 49453 $C12D RecoverRectangle Moves the rectangle bordered by r3,r2L to r4,r3H from the background screen to the foreground screen 49456 $C130 DrawLlne Draws a line from r3,rllL to r4,rllH If the sign flag of the status register (.P) is set, this routine copies the designated line from the background screen to the foreground screen; otherwise it draws a new line. If the carry flag of the status register is set, the routine draws the line using the foreground color (using 1 bits); otherwise it draws it in the background color (using 0 bits). 49459 $C133 DrawPolnt Draws the point r3,rllL If the sign flag of the status register (.P) is set, this routine copies the designated point from the background screen to the foreground screen; otherwise it draws a new point. If the carry flag of the status register is set, the wutine draws the point using the foreground color (a 1 bit); otherwise it draws it in the background color (using a 0 bit). 49462 $C136 GraphlcsString Executes the string of graphics commands pointed to by rO The commands consist of an opcode followed by data: Opcode name Number Data Function MOVEPENTO 1 x,y (.word,.byte) Move pen to x,y LINETO 2 x,y (.word,.byte) Draw line to x,y 270 n GEOS 49474 □ I i Opcode name RECTANGLETO PENFILL NEWPATTERN ESC-JPUTSTRING FRAME-RECTO ESC_BITMAP Number Data 3 x,y (.word,.byte) 4 NONE 5 PattemNumber (.byte) 6 NONE 7 x,y (.word,.byte) 8 NONE Function Draw rectangle to x,y Fill with current pattern Change cvuxent pattern Interpret rest of string as a putstring command Frame a rectangle to x,y Interpret rest of string as bitmap object Use 0 in the command position to end the string. 49465 $C139 SetPaflern Sets the area-fill pattern to one of 34 preset eight-bit X eight-bit patterns (0-33). This pattern is used by all drawing routines that fill an area when they draw, such as Rectangle. 49468 $C13C GetScanUne 49471 $C13F TestPolnt Returns the color of point r3,rllL in the carry flag If the bit is set to foreground color, the carry flag is set. If the bit is reset to background color, the carry flag is reset to zero. Background Generation 49474 $C142 BltmapUp Displays the compacted GEOS bitmap objects pointed to by rO at the horizontal byte boundary (0-39) specified in rlL and the scan line designated by rlH The width of the object in bytes (0-39) is passed in r2L, and its height in scan lines is passed in r2H. The data for GEOS bitmap objects is arranged more like that of sprites than that of normal bitmap graphics. Each data byte appears on screen to the right of the previous one until an entire row is completed, and then a new row is started directly underneath the old one. GEOS also uses a compaction scheme called run-length encoding to reduce the size of the data required for the bitmap object. Under this scheme, the graphics data is treated like one long string of bytes, without regard to line boundaries. This string of bytes is compacted 271 by breaking it down into Count/Bitmap groups. Each Count/Bitmap group consists of a Count byte followed by one or more data bytes. If the Count byte has a value of 127 or less, the following Bitmap data byte is repeated Count number of times. For example, a Count byte of 3 followed by a Bitmap data byte of 255 means that 3 bytes with the value 255 (a solid line) are drawn in a row. When this notation is used, only two bytes of data are required to depict an image that is three bytes long. Of course, a large part of most images is made up of nonrepeating data. If the Count byte has a value of 128-220, the next Count — 128 bytes of nonrepeating data are drawn one byte at a time. Sometimes you can find repeating patterns that are more than one byte long. For example, there may be a dotted-line pattern such as 255, 0, 0, 255, 0 that is repeated ten times in a row. For such cases, the GEOS bitmap format uses a Count byte of 221 to 255, followed by another special. Count b5^e called Bigcount, followed by the data for the repeating pattern. The number of bytes in the repeating pattern equals Count — 220. Bigcount indicates the number of times that the pattern is repeated. The actual data follows the Bigcount byte. For the example mentioned above, you would code the data with a Count byte of 225 to show that there are five bytes in the pattern, followed by a Bigcount byte of 10 to show that the pattern is repeated ten times, followed by the five bytes of the pattern. This seven-byte sequence can be used to replace a repeating pattern that is 50 bytes long. The following table summarizes the three different tj^es of Count bytes, and the data that follows these bytes: Count Followed by 0-127 A single data byte to be repeated Count times 128-220 Count — 128 bytes of nonrepeating data 221-255 A Bigcount byte (equal to number of times to repeat pattern) A repeating pattern of Count — 220 data bjrtes A single Bitmap Object can be made up of several Coumt/Bitmap groups. The three compression schemes can be mixed in any order. Character Manipulation 49477 $C145 PutChar Prints the ASCII character in the accumulator at position rll, rlH This command also supports a number of nonprinting command characters which are described under PutString, below. Note that commands that require data after the command character, such as the GOTO and NEWCARDSET commands, are not supported. 272

---
