# Memory Page 244

nome: LOAD
descrizione: ] ~| Load RAM from a Device This is a documented Kernal routine, whose entry in the jump table appears at 65493 ($FFD5). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 816 ($330). LOAD is used to transfer data from a device directly to RAM. It can also be used to verify RAM, comparing its contents to those of a disk or tape file. To choose between these operations you must set the Accumulator with a 0 for a LOAD, or a 1 for a VERIFY. Since the LOAD routine performs an OPEN, it must be preceded by a call to the SETLFS routine to specify the logical file number, device number, and secondary address, and a call to the SETNAM routine to specify the filename (a LOAD from tape can be performed without a filename being specified). Then the .X and .Y registers should be set with the starting address for the load, and the LOAD routine called. If the secondary address specified was a 1, this starting address will be ignored, and the header information will be used to supply the load address. If the secondary address was a 0, the address supplied by the call will be used. In either case, upon return from the routine, the .X and .Y registers will contain the address of the highest RAM location that was loaded. 62885 $F5A5 Print SEARCHING Message If in Direct Mode 62930 $F5D2 Print LOADING or VERIFYING n 62941 $F5DD SAVE Save RAM to a Device This is a documented Kernal routine, whose entry in the jump table appears at 65496 ($FFD8). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 818 ($332). SAVE '~j is used to transfer data directly from RAM to an I/O device. Since ' the SAVE routine performs an OPEN, it must be preceded by a call to the SETLFS routine to specify the logical file number, device n number, and secondary address, and a call to the SETNAM routine to specify the filename (although a SAVE to the cassette can be performed without giving a filename). A Page 0 pointer to the starting ' ^ 231
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 62622
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $F49E
man: Page 245

---
