# Memory Page 221

nome: OO
descrizione: CI2PRA Data Port Register A Bits 0-1: Select the 16K VIC-II chip memory bank (ll=bank 0, 00= bank 3) Bit 2: RS-232 data output (Sout)/Pin M of User Port Bit 3: Serial bus ATN signal output Bit 4: Serial bus clock pulse output Bit 5: Serial bus data output Bit 6: Serial bus clock pulse input Bit 7: Serial bus data input 56577 $DD01 CI2PRB Data Port Register 6 Bit 0: RS-232 data input (SIN)/ Pin C of User Port Bit 1: RS-232 request to send (RTS)/ Pin D of User Port Bit 2: RS-232 data terminal ready (DTR)/ Pin E of User Port Bit 3: RS-232 ring indicator (RI)/ Pin F of User Port Bit 4: RS-232 carrier detect (DCD)/ Pin H of User Port Bit 5: Pin J of User Port Bit 6: RS-232 clear to send (CTS)/ Pin K of User Port Toggle or pulse data output for Timer A Bit 7: RS-232 data set ready (DSR)/ Pin L of User Port Toggle or pulse data output for Timer B Location Range: 56578-56579 ($DD02$DD03) CIA #2 Data Direction Registers A and B These Data Direction registers control the direction of data flow over Data Ports A and B. For more details on the operation of these registers, see the entry for the CIA #1 Data Direction Registers at 56322 ($DC02).
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 56576
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $DD
man: Page 207

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Data Direction Register A 1= output) Select Bit 1 1= output) Select Bit 2 1= output) Select Bit 3 1 = output) Select Bit 4 1= output) Select Bit 5 1= output) Select Bit 6 1= output) Select Bit 7 1= output) C2DDRA of data Port A for input or output (0 = input, of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. of data Port A for input or output (0 = input. C2DDRB 56579 $DD03 Data Direction Register B Bit 0: Select Bit 0 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 1: Select Bit 1 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 2: Select Bit 2 of data Port B for input or output (0=input, 1= output) Bit 3: Select Bit 3 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 4: Select Bit 4 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 5: Select Bit 5 of data Port B for input or output (0=input, 1= output) Bit 6: Select Bit 6 of data Port B for input or output (0= input, 1= output) Bit 7: Select Bit 7 of data Port B for input or output (0=input, 1= output) 194
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 56578
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $DD02
man: Page 208

---

nome: TI2ALO
descrizione: Timer A (low byte) 56581 $DD05 TI2AHI Timer A (high byte) 56582 $DD06 TI2BLO Timer B (low byte) 56583 $DD07 TI2BHI Timer B (high byte) Location Range: 56584-56587 ($DD08$DDOB) Time of Day Clock In addition to the two general-purpose timers, the 6526 CIA chip has a special-purpose Time of Day Clock, which keeps time in a format that humans can understand a little more easily than microseconds. For more information about this clock, see the entry for Location Range 56328-56331 ($DC08-$DC0B). The 64's Operating System does not make use of these registers. 56584 $DD08 T02TEN Time of Day Clock Tenths of Seconds Bits 0-3: Time of Day tenths of second digit (BCD) Bits 4-7: Unused 56585 $DD09 T02SEC Time of Day Clock Seconds Bits 0-3: Second digit of Time of Day seconds (BCD) Bits 4-6: First digit of Time of Day seconds (BCD) Bit 7: Unused 195
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 56580
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $DD04
man: Page 209

---

nome: OA
descrizione: T02MIN Time of Day Clock Minutes Bits 0-3: Second digit of Time of Day minutes (BCD) Bits 4-6: First digit of Time of Day minutes (BCD) Bit 7: Unused 56587 $DDOB T02HRS Time of Day Clock Hours Bits 0-3: Second digit of Time of Day hours (BCD) Bit 4: First digit of Time of Day hours (BCD) Bits 5-6: Unused Bit 7: AM/PM flag (1=PM, 0=AM) 56588 $DDOC CI2SDR Serial Data Port The CIA chip has an on-chip serial port, which allows you to send or receive a byte of data one bit at a time, with the most significant bit (Bit 7) being transferred first. For more information about its use, see the entry for location 56332 ($DCOC). The 64's Operating System does not use this facility. 56589 $DDOD CI2ICR Interrupt Control Register Bit 0: Read/ did Timer A count down to 0? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable Timer A interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 1: Read/ did Timer B count down to 0? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable Timer B interrupt (l=enable, 0= disable) Bit 2: Read/ did Time of Day Clock reach the alarm time? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable TOD clock alarm interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 3: Read/ did the serial shift register finish, a byte? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable serial shift register interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 4: Read/ was a signal sent on the FLAG line? (l=yes) Write/enable or disable FLAG line interrupt (1= enable, 0= disable) Bit 5: Not used Bit 6: Not used Bit 7: Read/ did any CIA #2 source cause an interrupt? (l=yes) Write/set or clear bits of this register (l=bits written with 1 will be set, 0=bits written with 1 will be cleared) This register is used to control the five interrupt sources on the 6526 196
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 56586
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $DD
man: Page 210

---

nome: OE
descrizione: CI2CRA Control Register A Bit 0: Start Timer A (l=start, O=stop) Bit 1: Select Timer A output on Port B (1= Timer A output appears on Bit 6 of Port B) Bit 2: Port B output mode (l=toggle Bit 6, 0=pulse Bit 6 for one cycle) Bit 3: Timer A run mode (1= one-shot, 0= continuous) Bit 4: Force latched value to be loaded to Timer A counter (l=force load strobe) Bit 5: Timer A input mode (l=count microprocessor cycles, O=count signals on CNT line at pin 4 of User Port) Bit 6: Serial port (56588, $DDOC) mode (l=output, 0=input) Bit 7: Time of Day Clock frequency (1=50 Hz required on TOD pin, 0=60 Hz) 56591 $DDOF CI2CRB Control Register B Bit 0: Start Timer B (l=start, O=stop) Bit 1: Select Timer B output on Port B (1= Timer B output appears on Bit 7 of Port B) Bit 2: Port B output mode (l=toggle Bit 7, 0=pulse Bit 7 for one n cycle) Bit 3: Timer B run mode (l=one-shot, O=continuous) Bit 4: Force latched value to be loaded to Timer B counter (l=force load strobe) I I Bits 5-6: Timer B input mode 00 = Timer B counts microprocessor cycles 01 = Count signals on CNT line at pin 4 of User Port 10 = Count each time that Timer A counts down to 0 ' 11 = Count Timer A O's when CNT pulses are also present Bit 7: Select Time of Day write (0=vmting to TOD registers sets j*^ alarm, 1 = writing to TOD registers sets clock 197
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 56590
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $DD
man: Page 211 56592-56831 Location Range: 56592-56831 ($DD10$DDFF) CIA #2 Register Images Since the CIA chip requires only enough addressing lines to handle 16 registers, none of the higher bits are decoded when addressing the 256-byte area that has been assigned to it. The result is that every 16-byte area in this 256-byte block is a mirror of every other. For the sake of clarity in your programs, it is advisable not to use these addresses. Location Range: 56832-57087 ($DEOO$DEFF) Reserved for I/O Expansion This range of locations is not used directly by the 64's internal hardware. It is, however, accessible via pin 7 of the Expansion Port. It can be used to control cartridges which are connected to this port. For example, the CP/M module uses this space to control which microprocessor is in control of the system. The Z-80 microprocessor is turned on and off by writing to 56832 ($DEOO). Another cartridge which uses this space is Simon's BASIC. This 16K cartridge is addressed at memory locations 32768-49151 ($8000$BFFF), which means that it overlaps the regular BASIC ROM at 40960-49151 ($AOOO-$BFFF). But since it contains additions to BASIC, it must use the BASIC ROM as well. This problem is solved by copying the cartridge at 32768-40959 ($8000-$9FFF) to RAM, and turning the cartridge on and off by writing to or reading from location 56832 ($DE00). Location Range: 57088-57343 ($DFOO$DFFF) CIA #2 Register Images This range of locations is not used directly by the 64's internal hardware, but is accessible via pin 10 of the Expansion Port. One possible use for this I/O memory that Commodore has mentioned is an inexpensive parallel disk, drive (which presumably would be much faster than the current serial model). Alternate 53248-57343 ($D000$DFFF): Character Generator ROM The character generator ROM supplies the data which is used to form the shapes of the text and graphics characters that are dis198 Page 212 53248-57343 played on screen. Each character requires eight bytes of shape data, and these eight-byte sequences are arranged in the order in which the characters appear in the screen code chart (see Appendix G). For example, the first eight bytes of data in the ROM hold the shape information for the commercial at sign (@), the next eight hold the shape of the letter A, etc. In all, there are 4096 bytes, representing shape data for two complete character sets of 256 characters each — IK each for uppercase/graphics, reverse uppercase/reverse graphics, lowercase/uppercase, and reverse lowercase/reverse uppercase. The shape of each character is formed by an 8 by 8 matrix of screen dots. Whether any of the 64 dots is lit up or not is determined by the bit patterns of the character data. Each byte of the Character ROM holds a number from 0 to 255. This number can be represented by eight binary digits of 0 or 1. The leftmost bit of these eight is known as Bit 7, while the rightmost bit is called Bit 0. Each of these binary digits has a bit value that is two times greater than the last. The values of a bit set to 1 in each of the bit places are: Bit 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Value 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 A byte whose value is 255 has every bit set to 1 (128 + 64-1-32 + 16-18+4+2+1=255), while a byte whose value is 0 is made up of all zero bits. Numbers in between are made up of combinations of bits set to 1 and bits set to 0. If you think of every bit that holds a 0 as a dot on the screen which is the color of the screen background, and every bit that holds a 1 as a dot whose color is that of the appropriate nybble in Color RAM, you can begin to get an idea of how the byte values relate to the shape of the character. For example, if you PEEK at the first eight bytes of the character ROM (the technique is explained in the entry for location 1), you will see the numbers 60, 102, 110, 110, 96, 98, 60, 0. Breaking these data bytes down into their bit values gives us a picture that looks like the following: 00111100 0 + 0 + 32 + 16+ 8+ 4 + 0 + 0 = 60 01100110 0 + 64 + 32 + 0 + 0+ 4+ 2+ 0 = 102 01101110 0 + 64+ 32+ 0+ 8+ 4 + 2+ 0 = 110 01101110 0 + 64+ 32+ 0+ 8+ 4+ 2 + 0 = 110 01100000 0 + 64 + 32+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0 = 96 01100010 0 + 64+ 32 + 0 + 0+ 0+ 2+ 0 = 98 00111100 0 + 0+ 32 + 16+ 8+ 4+ 0+ 0 = 60 00000000 0 + 0+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0+ 0 = 0 If you look closely, you will recognize the shape of the commercial at sign (@) as it's displayed on your screen. The first byte of data is 60, and you can see that Bits 5, 4, 3, and 2 are set to 1. The chart above shows that the bit values for these bits are 32, 16, 8, and 4. 199 Page 213 53248-57343 Adding these together, you get 32+16+8+4=60. This should give you an idea of how the byte value corresponds to the patterns of lit dots. For an even more graphic display, type in the following program, which shows the shape of any of the 512 characters in the ROM, along with the number value of each byte of the shape. 10 DIM B%(7),T%{7): FOR 1=0 TO 7: T%(I)=2tl: NEXT 20 POKE 53281,2: PRINT CHR$(147): POKE 53281,1: PO KE 53280,0: POKE 646,11 30 POKE 214,20: PRINT: INPUT " CHARACTER NUMBER (0 -511)";C$ 40 C=VAL(C$): GOSUB 80: FOR 1=0 TO 7 50 POKE 214, 6+1: PRINT: PRINT TAB( 23 ) ;B% ( I ) ; CHR$ ( 20) ;"{3 SPACES}" 60 FOR J=7 TO 0 STEP-1: POKE 1319+( 7-J)+I*40, 32-12 8*((B%(I)ANDT%(J) )=T%(J)) 70 NEXT J, I: POKE 214,20: PRINT: PRINT TAB(27)" {4 SPACES}": GOTO 30 80 POKE 56333,127: POKE 1,51:F0R 1=0 TO 7 90 B%(I)=PEEK(53248+C*8+I) : NEXT: POKE 1,55: POKE {SPACE} 56333, 129: RETURN If you have read about the VIC-II video chip, you know that it can address only 16K of memory at a time, and that all display data such as screen memory, character shape data, and sprite shape data must be stored within that 16K block. Since it would be very inconvenient for the VIC-II chip to be able to access the character data only at the 16K block which includes addresses 53248-57343 ($DOOO-$DFFF), the 64 uses an addressing trick that makes the VIC-II chip see an image of the Character ROM at 4096-8191 ($1000-$1FFF) and at 36864-40959 ($9000-$9FFF). It is not available in the other two blocks. To generate characters in these blocks, you must supply your own userdefined character set, or copy the ROM data to RAM. A machine language routine for doing this is included in a sample program at the entry for 56576 ($DD00). As indicated above, you are by no means limited to using the character data furnished by the ROM. The availability of userdefined characters greatly extends the graphics power of the 64. It allows you to create special text characters, like math or chemistry symbols and foreign language alphabets. You can also develop special graphics characters as a substitute for plotting points in bitmap graphics. You can achieve the same resolution using a custom character as in high-resolution bitmap mode, but with less memory. Once you have defined the character, it is much faster to print it to the screen than it would be to plot out all of the individual points. To employ user-defined characters, you must first pick a spot to put the shape data. This requires choosing a bank of 16K for video 200 Page 214 53248-57343 chip memory (see the entry under Bits 0-1 of 56576, $DDOO for the considerations involved), and setting the pointer to the 2K area of character memory in 53272 ($D018). It is then up to you to supply the shape data for the characters. You can use part of the ROM character set by reading the ROM and transferring the data to your character shape area (see the entry for location 1 for a method of reading the ROM). Your original characters may be created by darkening squares on an 8 by 8 grid, converting all darkened squares to their bit values, and then adding the bit values for each of the eight bytes. Or, you may use one of the many character graphics editor programs that are available commercially to generate the data interactively by drawing on the screen. One graphics mode, multicolor text mode, almost requires that you define your own character set in order to use it effectively. Multicolor mode is enabled by Bit 4 of location 53270 ($D016). Instead of using each bit to control whether an individual dot will be foreground color (1) or background color (0), that mode breaks down each byte of shape data in four bit-pairs. These bit-pairs control whether a dot will be the color in Background Color Register #0 (00), the color in Background Color Register #1 (01), the color in Background Color Register #2 (10), or the color in the appropriate nybble of Color RAM (11). Since each pair of bits controls one dot, each character is only four dots across. To make up for this, each dot is twice as wide as a normal high-resolution dot. 201 Page 215 The text on this page is estimated to be only 3.00% accurate □ y a P O u G U Q Page 216 Chapter 7 8K Operating System Kernal ROM Page 217 The text on this page is estimated to be only 3.00% accurate □ y a P O u G U Q Page 218 n 8K Operating System Kernal ROM Locations 57344 to 65535 ($E000 to $FFFF) are used by the 8K Operating System Kemal ROM. This ROM contains the master control program that directs all of the computer's input and output. When you turn the 64's power on, this program takes over and performs the various internal tasks which are necessary to enable you to use the computer. These include such things as clearing RAM, getting the I/O devices and video display chip ready for use, setting various pointers, checking for autostart cartridges, and setting up BASIC if no such cartridges are found. The Kemal ROM contains many useful I/O routines that you might wish to incorporate in your own programs. However, the Kemal ROM is subject to revision (it was revised twice in the first six months alone), and these routines are not guaranteed to stay in the same place. This means that if your programs make direct jumps into the ROM, there is no telling if your program will work with future versions of the Kemal on later Commodore models. To help avoid these incompatability problems. Commodore provides a jump table at the end of the ROM which points to the current location of each of a number of these routines in any given Kemal. J— ) This jump table has been a feature of all Commodore computers L ! from the beginning, and has been expanded in the 64 to include 39 separate routines. The jump vectors for the original 15 routines which have always been included in the table (such as the one to I j the routine which outputs a character) are the same as on previous Commodore computers. By having your program jump to the table address rather than directly to the routine desired, you can guarantee r~\ that your program will work without modification on future versions ' of the 64, as well as on future Commodore models. To the extent that your programs do not require the enhanced r— ! graphics capabilities of the 64, they can also be made to work with ' _ i the PET and VIC-20 computers. So remember: While jumping to undocumented entry points may save time in the short mn, in the long mn it may cause compatibility problems and should be avoided. n 205 Page 219

---
