# Memory Page 177

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Check If .A Register Holds Alphabetic ASCII Character This is part of the check for a valid variable name (it must start with an alphabetic character). 45341 $B11D NOTFNS Create a New BASIC Variable This routine makes space for a seven-byte descriptor by moving the variable storage area seven bytes higher in memory, and then creates the descriptor. 45445 $B185 FINPTR Return the Address of the Variable That Was Found or Created This routine stores the address of the variable that was found or created by the preceding routines in a pointer at 71-72 ($47-$48). 45460 $B194 ARYGET Allocate Space for Array Descriptors This routine allocates five bytes plus two bytes for every dimension specified for the array descriptor. 45477 $B1A5 N32768 The Constant -32768 in Five-Byte Floating Point Format This constant is used for range checking in the conversion of a floating point number to a signed integer (the minimum integer value is -32768). 45482 $B1AA Convert a Floating Point Number to a Signed Integer in .A and .Y Registers This subroutine calls AYINT, below, which checks to make sure that the number in the Floating Point Accumulator is between 32767 and -32768, and converts it to a 16-bit signed interger in 100-101 ($64-$65), high byte first. It leaves the high byte of the integer in the Accumulator, and the low byte in the .Y register. Although this routine does not appear to be referenced anywhere in BASIC, the vector at locations 3-4 points to its address. Presumably, it is provided for the benefit of the user who wishes to pass parameters in a USR call, or the like. 45490 $B1B2 INTIDX Input and Convert a Floating Point Subscript to a Positive Integer This routine converts a floating point subscript value to an integer, making sure first that it is positive. 105
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 45331
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B113
man: Page 119

---

nome: AYINT
descrizione: j | Convert a Floating Point Number to a Signed Integer ' — ' This subroutine first checks to make sure that the number in the Floating Point Accumulator is between 32767 and -32768. If it is \ j not, an ILLEGAL QUANTITY error results. If it is, the routine con- ' — ' U verts it to a 16-bit signed integer with the high byte in location 100 ($64), and the low byte in location 101 ($65). 45521 $B1D1 ISARY Find Array Element or Create New Array in RAM This routine searches for an array. If it is found, the subscript value is checked to see if it is valid, and pointers to the array and element of the array are set. If it is not found, the array is created, and the pointers set. 45637 $B245 BSERR Print BAD SUBSCRIPT Error Message 45640 $B248 FCERR Print ILLEGAL QUANTITY Error Message 45900 $B34C UMULT Compute the Size of a Multidimensional Array This routine calculates the size of a multidimensional array by multiplying the dimensions. 45949 $B37D FRE Perform FRE The FRE function calls the garbage collection routine at 46374 ($B526) to get rid of unused string text, and calculates the difference between the bottom of string text and the top of array storage. It then drops through to the following routine, which assumes that the \ ) free memory value is a signed 16-bit integer, and converts it to float- ' — ' ing point accordingly. Of course, while the free memory space on the PET might have i j always been 32767 or less (the maximum value of a signed integer), ( j such is definitely not the case on the 64. Because the conversion is from a signed integer, any memory value over 32767 will be regarded as negative (the high bit is treated as a sign bit). Therefore, for [ '. these higher values you must add twice the bit value of the high bit (65536) in order to come up with the correct value. The expression FRE (0)-65536*(FRE(0)<0) will always return the correct amount of I { free memory. ' — ' 106 U
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 45503
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $B1BF
man: Page 120

---
