# Memory Page 165

nome: INLIN
descrizione: Input a Line to Buffer from Keyboard This subroutine calls the Kemal CHRIN routine (61783, $F157) to obtain a line of input from the current input device (usually the keyboard). It stores the characters in the BASIC text input buffer at 512 ($200) until a carriage return or 89 characters have been received. The keyboard device wiW never return more than 80 characters before a carriage return, but other devices can output a longer line. An error will occur if the line goes over 88 characters. 42361 $A579 CRUNCH Tokenize Line in Input Buffer When a line of program text has been input into the BASIC text buffer at 512 ($200), this routine goes through the line and changes any keywords or their abbreviations, which do not appear in quotes, into the corresponding token. This command is vectored through RAM at 772 ($304), so it can be diverted in order to add new commands. 42515 $A613 FNDLIN Search for Line Number This routine searches through the program text, trying to match the two-byte integer line number that is stored in 20-21 ($14-$15). If it is found, 95-96 ($5F-$60) will be set as a pointer to the address of the link field for that line, and the Carry flag will be set. If it is not found, the Carry flag will be cleared. 42562 $A642 SCRTCH Perform NEW The NEW command stores two. zeros in the link address of the first program line to indicate the end of program, and sets the end of program pointer at 45-46 ($2D-$2E) to point to the byte past those zeros. It continues through to the CLR command code. 42590 $A65E CLEAR Perform CLR The CLR command closes all I/O files with the Kemal CLALL routine (62255, $F32F). It eliminates string variables by copying the end of memory pointer at 55-56 ($37-$38) to the bottom of strings pointer at 51-52 ($33-$34). It also copies the pointer to end of BASIC program text at 49-50 ($31-$32) to the pointer to the start of nonarray variables at 45-46 ($2D-$2E), the start of array variables at 47-48 ($2F-$30), and the end of array variables at 49-50 ($31-$32). This makes these variables unusable (although the contents of these areas are not actually erased). RESTORE is called to set the data pointer back to the beginning, and the stack is cleared. 96
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 42336
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $A560
man: Page 110

---
