# Memory Page 242

nome: CHKIN
descrizione: Designate a Logical File As the Current Input Channel This is a documented Kemal routine which can be entered from the jump table at 65478 ($FFC6). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 798 ($31E). If you wish to get data from any device other than the keyboard, this routine must be called after OPENing the device, before you can get a data byte with the CHRIN or GETIN routine. When called, the routine will designate the logical file whose file number is in the .X register as the current file, its device as the current device, and its secondary address as the current secondary address. If the device on the channel is a serial device, which requires a TALK command and sometimes a secondary address, this routine will send them over the serial bus. 62032 $F250 CHKOUT Designate a Logical File As the Current Output Channel This is a documented Kernal routine which can be entered from the jump table at 65481 ($FFC9). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 800 ($320). If you wish to output data to any device other than the screen, this routine must be called after OPENing the device, and before you output a data byte with the CHROUT routine. When called, the routine will designate the logical file whose file number is in the .X register as the current file, its device as the current device, and its secondary address as the current secondary address. If the device on the channel uses the serial bus, and therefore requires a LISTEN command and possibly a secondary address, this information will be sent on the bus. 62097 $F291 CLOSE Close a Logical I/O File CLOSE is a documented Kemal routine which can be entered via the jump table at 65475 ($FFC3). The routine jumps through a RAM vector at 796 ($31C). It is r— , used to close a logical file after all I/O operations involving that file 1 I have been completed. This is accomplished by loading the Accumulator with the logical file number of the file to be closed, and calling this routine. f{ Closing an RS-232 file will de-allocate space at the top of memory for the receiving and transmit buffers. Closing a cassette file that was opened for writing will force the last block to be written to caspn sette, even if it is not a full 192 bytes. Closing a serial bus device ' ! wUl send an UNLISTEN command on the bus. Remember, it is 229 n
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 61966
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $F20E
man: Page 243

---
