# Memory Page 234

nome: SCNKEY
descrizione: Read the Keyboard This subroutine is called by the IRQ interrupt handler above to read the keyboard device which is connected to CIA #1 (see the entry for 56320, $DCOO for details on how to read the keyboard). It is the Kemal routine SCNKEY which can be entered from the jump table at 65439 ($FF9F). This routine returns the keycode of the key currently being pressed in 203 ($CB), sets the shift/control flag if appropriate, and jumps through the vector at 655 ($28F) to the routine that sets up the proper table to translate the keycode to PETASCII. It concludes with the next routine, which places the PETASCII value of the character in the keyboard buffer. 60128 $EAEO Decode the Keystroke and Place Its ASCII Value in the Keyboard Buffer This is the continuation of the IRQ keyscan routine. It decodes the keycode with the proper PETASCII table, and compares it with the last keystroke. If it is the same, it checks to see if it is okay to repeat the character without waiting for the key to be let up. If the character should be printed, it is moved to the end of the keyboard buffer at 631 ($277). 60232 $EB48 Set Up the Proper Keyboard Decode Table This routine is pointed to by the vector at 655 ($28F). Its function is to read the shift/control flag at 653 ($28D), and set the value of the decode table pointer at 245 ($F5) accordingly. First it checks if the SHIFT/Commodore logo combination was pressed, and if the toggle enable at 657 ($291) will allow a change, the character set will be changed to lowercase/uppercase or uppercase/graphics by changing the VIC Memory Control Register at 53272 ($D018), and no character will be printed. Next it sets the decode table pointer. There are 64 keys, and each can have four different PETASCII values, depending on whether the key is pressed by itself, or in combination with the SHIFT, CTRL, or Commodore logo keys. Therefore, there are four tables of 220
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 60039
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $EA87
man: Page 234

---
