# Memory Page 228

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Patch for BASIC Call of CHKOUT This patch was made to preserve the .A register if there was no error retumed from BASIC'S call of the Kemal CHKOUT routine. Apparently, the first version could cause a malfunction of the CMD and PRINT* commands. 58551 $E4B7 28 Unused Bytes (all have the value of 170, $AA) 58579 $E4DA Patch to RS232 Routine 58586 $E4DA Clear Color RAM to the Color of Text Foreground This routine is a patch added to the more recent versions of the Kemal. It is called by the routine which clears a screen line (59903, $E9FF), and it places the value of the current foreground color in 646 ($286) into the current byte of Color RAM pointed to by USER (243, $F3). In the original version of the Kemal, the routine that cleared a screen line set the corresponding Color RAM to a value of 1, which gives text characters a white foreground color. This was changed in I— , version zero because the white color was found to sometimes cause / 1 light flashes during screen scrolling. It was that white foreground color, however, that enabled the user to POKE the screen code for a character into screen RAM, and make that character appear on the } j screen in a color that contrasted the blue background. This change to the Operating System caused colors POKEd to screen RAM to be the same color as the background, and thus made them invisible. By r~J initializing Color RAM to the current foreground color, version 3 of ' ' the Kemal solved this problem. Owners of old 64s can find the solution to the "invisible POKE" ^ problem in the discussion that begins on the bottom of page 81. 213
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 58541
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $E4AD
man: Page 227

---

nome: UNKNOWN
descrizione: Pause after Finding a File on Cassette This routine is a patch to the routine which finds a file on cassette. After the file is found, the message FILETITLE FOUND appears on the screen. On the original versions of the Kemal, the user would then have to hit the Commodore key to continue the load. On the newer versions, this patch causes a slight pause after a tape file is found, during which time a keypress is looked for. If a key is | j pressed, the loading process continues immediately. If it is not, the load continues by itself after the end of the pause. 58604 $E4EC Baud Rate Table for European (PAL) Standard Monitors This table of prescaler values was added to later Kernal versions to allow the same Kemal software to be used with either U.S. or European 64s. It contains the values which are required to obtain interrupts at the proper frequency for the standard RS-232 baud rates, and corresponds exactly in format to the table of values for the U.S. (NTSC) monitor format at 65218 ($FEC2). Separate tables are required because the prescaler values are derived from dividing the system clock rate by the baud rate, and PAL machines operate with a slightly slower clock frequency. 58624 $E500 lOBASE Store Base Address of Memory-Mapped I/O Devices in .X and .Y Registers This is one of the documented Kemal routines for which there is a vector in the jump table at 65523 ($FFF3). When called, this routine sets the .X register to the low byte of the base address of the memory-mapped I/O devices, and puts the high byte in the .Y register. This allows a user to set up a zero-page pointer to the device, and to load and store indirectly through that pointer. A program which uses this method, rather than directly j j accessing such devices, could be made to function without change on i i future Commodore models, even though the I/O chips may be addressed at different locations. This of course assumes that the CIA or a similar chip will be used. This routine is of limited value for creat- [_J ing software that is compatible with both the VIC-20 and the 64 because of the differences in the VIA I/O chip that VIC uses. The current version of this routine loads the .X register with a 0, i j and the .Y register with 220 ($DC), thus pointing to CIA #1, which ' — ' is at 56320 ($DCOO). I /
indirizzo_memoria_decimale: 58592
indirizzo_memoria_hex: $E4E0
man: Page 228

---
